place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot high. we had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep and the bushes so thick.  we tramped and clumb around all over it, and by and by found a good big cavern in the rock, most up to the top on the side towards illinois.  the cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched together, and jim could stand up straight in it.  it was cool in there. jim was for putting our traps in there right away, but i said we didn't want to be climbing up and down there all the time. jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island, and they would never find us without dogs.  and, besides, he said them little birds had said it was going to rain, and did i want the things to get wet? so we went back and got the canoe, and paddled up abreast the cavern, and lugged all the traps up there.  then we hunted up a place close by to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick willows.  we took some fish off of the lines and set them again, and begun to get ready for dinner. the door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a good place to build a fire on.  so we built it there and cooked dinner. we spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in there. we put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern.  pretty soon it darkened up, and begun to thunder and lighten; so the birds was right about it.  directly it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury, too, and i never see the wind blow so.  it was one of these regular summer storms.  it would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside, and lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the leaves; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild; and next, when it was just about the bluest and blackest--_fst_! it was as bright as glory, and you'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm, hundreds of yards further than you could see before; dark as sin again in a second, and now you'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash, and then go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling, down the sky towards the under side of the world, like rolling empty barrels down stairs--where it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know. "jim, this is nice," i says.  "i wouldn't want to be nowhere else but here. pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread." "well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for jim.  you'd a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn' mos' drownded, too; dat you would, honey.  chickens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do de birds, chile." the river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days, till at last it was over the banks.  the water was three or four foot deep on the island in the low places and on the illinois bottom.  on that side it was a good many miles wide, but on the missouri side it was the same old distance across--a half a mile--because the missouri shore was just a wall of high bluffs. daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, it was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blazing outside.  we went winding in and out amongst the trees, and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way.  well, on every old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things; and when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame, on account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your hand on them if you wanted to; but not the snakes and turtles--they would slide off in the water.  the ridge our cavern was in was full of them. we could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them. one night we catched a little section of a lumber raft--nice pine planks. it was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long, and the top stood above water six or seven inches--a solid, level floor.  we could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes, but we let them go; we didn't show ourselves in daylight. another night when we was up at the head of the island, just before daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side.  she was a two-story, and tilted over considerable.  we paddled out and got aboard--clumb in at an upstairs window.  but it was too dark to see yet, so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight. the light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island.  then we looked in at the window.  we could make out a bed, and a table, and two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there was clothes hanging against the wall.  there was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man.  so jim says: "hello, you!" but it didn't budge.  so i hollered again, and then jim says: "de man ain't asleep--he's dead.  you hold still--i'll go en see." he went, and bent down and looked, and says: "it's a dead man.  yes, indeedy; naked, too.  he's ben shot in de back. i reck'n he's ben dead two er three days.  come in, huck, but doan' look at his face--it's too gashly." i didn't look at him at all.  jim throwed some old rags over him, but he needn't done it; i didn't want to see him.  there was heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles, and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.  there was two old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some women's underclothes hanging against the wall, and some men's clothing, too.  we put the lot into the canoe--it might come good.  there was a boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor; i took that, too.  and there was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck.  we would a took the bottle, but it was broke.  there was a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke.  they stood open, but there warn't nothing left in them that was any account.  the way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a hurry, and warn't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff. we got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and a bran-new barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tallow candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins and beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet and some nails, and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some monstrous hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar, and a horseshoe, and some vials of medicine that didn't have no label on them; and just as we was leaving i found a tolerable good curry-comb, and jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden leg.  the straps was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though it was too long for me and not long enough for jim, and we couldn't find the other one, though we hunted all around. and so, take it all around, we made a good haul.  when we was ready to shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was pretty broad day; so i made jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways off.  i paddled over to the illinois shore, and drifted down most a half a mile doing it.  i crept up the dead water under the bank, and hadn't no accidents and didn't see nobody.  we got home all safe. chapter x. after breakfast i wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he come to be killed, but jim didn't want to.  he said it would fetch bad luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man that warn't buried was more likely to go a-ha'nting around than one that was planted and comfortable.  that sounded pretty reasonable, so i didn't say no more; but i couldn't keep from studying over it and wishing i knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for. we rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat.  jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat, because if they'd a knowed the money was there they wouldn't a left it.  i said i reckoned they killed him, too; but jim didn't want to talk about that.  i says: "now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when i fetched in the snake-skin that i found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday? you said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin with my hands.  well, here's your bad luck!  we've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides.  i wish we could have some bad luck like this every day, jim." "never you mind, honey, never you mind.  don't you git too peart.  it's a-comin'.  mind i tell you, it's a-comin'." it did come, too.  it was a tuesday that we had that talk.  well, after dinner friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the ridge, and got out of tobacco.  i went to the cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there.  i killed him, and curled him up on the foot of jim's blanket, ever so natural, thinking there'd be some fun when jim found him there.  well, by night i forgot all about the snake, and when jim flung himself down on the blanket while i struck a light the snake's mate was there, and bit him. he jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the varmint curled up and ready for another spring.  i laid him out in a second with a stick, and jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and begun to pour it down. he was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel.  that all comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it.  jim told me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the body and roast a piece of it.  i done it, and he eat it and said it would help cure him. he made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist, too.  he said that that would help.  then i slid out quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for i warn't going to let jim find out it was all my fault, not if i could help it. jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again.  his foot swelled up pretty big, and so did his leg; but by and by the drunk begun to come, and so i judged he was all right; but i'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's whisky. jim was laid up for four days and nights.  then the swelling was all gone and he was around again.  i made up my mind i wouldn't ever take a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that i see what had come of it. jim said he reckoned i would believe him next time.  and he said that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn't got to the end of it yet.  he said he druther see the new moon over his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his hand.  well, i was getting to feel that way myself, though i've always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.  old hank bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread himself out so that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried him so, so they say, but i didn't see it.  pap told me.  but anyway it all come of looking at the moon that way, like a fool. well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a man, being six foot two inches long, and weighed over two hundred pounds. we couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us into illinois.  we just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded.  we found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball, and lots of rubbage.  we split the ball open with the hatchet, and there was a spool in it.  jim said he'd had it there a long time, to coat it over so and make a ball of it.  it was as big a fish as was ever catched in the mississippi, i reckon.  jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one.  he would a been worth a good deal over at the village.  they peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there; everybody buys some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes a good fry. next morning i said it was getting slow and dull, and i wanted to get a stirring up some way.  i said i reckoned i would slip over the river and find out what was going on.  jim liked that notion; but he said i must go in the dark and look sharp.  then he studied it over and said, couldn't i put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?  that was a good notion, too.  so we shortened up one of the calico gowns, and i turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it.  jim hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.  i put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe.  jim said nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly.  i practiced around all day to get the hang of the things, and by and by i could do pretty well in them, only jim said i didn't walk like a girl; and he said i must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket.  i took notice, and done better. i started up the illinois shore in the canoe just after dark. i started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing, and the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town.  i tied up and started along the bank.  there was a light burning in a little shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time, and i wondered who had took up quarters there.  i slipped up and peeped in at the window.  there was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was on a pine table.  i didn't know her face; she was a stranger, for you couldn't start a face in that town that i didn't know.  now this was lucky, because i was weakening; i was getting afraid i had come; people might know my voice and find me out.  but if this woman had been in such a little town two days she could tell me all i wanted to know; so i knocked at the door, and made up my mind i wouldn't forget i was a girl. chapter xi. "come in," says the woman, and i did.  she says:  "take a cheer." i done it.  she looked me all over with her little shiny eyes, and says: "what might your name be?" "sarah williams." "where 'bouts do you live?  in this neighborhood?' "no'm.  in hookerville, seven mile below.  i've walked all the way and i'm all tired out." "hungry, too, i reckon.  i'll find you something." "no'm, i ain't hungry.  i was so hungry i had to stop two miles below here at a farm; so i ain't hungry no more.  it's what makes me so late. my mother's down sick, and out of money and everything, and i come to tell my uncle abner moore.  he lives at the upper end of the town, she says.  i hain't ever been here before.  do you know him?" "no; but i don't know everybody yet.  i haven't lived here quite two weeks. it's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town.  you better stay here all night.  take off your bonnet." "no," i says; "i'll rest a while, i reckon, and go on.  i ain't afeared of the dark." she said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband would be in by and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me. then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations up the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much better off they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake coming to our town, instead of letting well alone--and so on and so on, till i was afeard i had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was going on in the town; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder, and then i was pretty willing to let her clatter right along.  she told about me and tom sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what a hard lot i was, and at last she got down to where i was murdered.  i says: "who done it?  we've heard considerable about these goings on down in hookerville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed huck finn." "well, i reckon there's a right smart chance of people _here_ that'd like to know who killed him.  some think old finn done it himself." "no--is that so?" "most everybody thought it at first.  he'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched.  but before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named jim." "why _he_--" i stopped.  i reckoned i better keep still.  she run on, and never noticed i had put in at all: "the nigger run off the very night huck finn was killed.  so there's a reward out for him--three hundred dollars.  and there's a reward out for old finn, too--two hundred dollars.  you see, he come to town the morning after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt, and right away after he up and left.  before night they wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.  well, next day they found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done.  so then they put it on him, you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old finn, and went boo-hooing to judge thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over illinois with. the judge gave him some, and that evening he got drunk, and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard-looking strangers, and then went off with them.  well, he hain't come back sence, and they ain't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he'd get huck's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit.  people do say he warn't any too good to do it.  oh, he's sly, i reckon.  if he don't come back for a year he'll be all right.  you can't prove anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and he'll walk in huck's money as easy as nothing." "yes, i reckon so, 'm.  i don't see nothing in the way of it.  has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?" "oh, no, not everybody.  a good many thinks he done it.  but they'll get the nigger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him." "why, are they after him yet?" "well, you're innocent, ain't you!  does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up?  some folks think the nigger ain't far from here.  i'm one of them--but i hain't talked it around.  a few days ago i was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty, and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call jackson's island.  don't anybody live there? says i. no, nobody, says they.  i didn't say any more, but i done some thinking.  i was pretty near certain i'd seen smoke over there, about the head of the island, a day or two before that, so i says to myself, like as not that nigger's hiding over there; anyway, says i, it's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt.  i hain't seen any smoke sence, so i reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but husband's going over to see--him and another man.  he was gone up the river; but he got back to-day, and i told him as soon as he got here two hours ago." i had got so uneasy i couldn't set still.  i had to do something with my hands; so i took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it. my hands shook, and i was making a bad job of it.  when the woman stopped talking i looked up, and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little.  i put down the needle and thread, and let on to be interested--and i was, too--and says: "three hundred dollars is a power of money.  i wish my mother could get it. is your husband going over there to-night?" "oh, yes.  he went up-town with the man i was telling you of, to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun.  they'll go over after midnight." "couldn't they see better if they was to wait till daytime?" "yes.  and couldn't the nigger see better, too?  after midnight he'll likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark, if he's got one." "i didn't think of that." the woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and i didn't feel a bit comfortable.  pretty soon she says, "what did you say your name was, honey?" "m--mary williams." somehow it didn't seem to me that i said it was mary before, so i didn't look up--seemed to me i said it was sarah; so i felt sort of cornered, and was afeared maybe i was looking it, too.  i wished the woman would say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier i was.  but now she says: "honey, i thought you said it was sarah when you first come in?" "oh, yes'm, i did.  sarah mary williams.  sarah's my first name.  some calls me sarah, some calls me mary." "oh, that's the way of it?" "yes'm." i was feeling better then, but i wished i was out of there, anyway.  i couldn't look up yet. well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place, and so forth and so on, and then i got easy again.  she was right about the rats. you'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while.  she said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace.  she showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot with it generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't know whether she could throw true now.  but she watched for a chance, and directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and said "ouch!" it hurt her arm so.  then she told me to try for the next one.  i wanted to be getting away before the old man got back, but of course i didn't let on.  i got the thing, and the first rat that showed his nose i let drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a tolerable sick rat.  she said that was first-rate, and she reckoned i would hive the next one.  she went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back, and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with.  i held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and went on talking about her and her husband's matters.  but she broke off to say: "keep your eye on the rats.  you better have the lead in your lap, handy." so she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment, and i clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking.  but only about a minute. then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face, and very pleasant, and says: "come, now, what's your real name?" "wh--what, mum?" "what's your real name?  is it bill, or tom, or bob?--or what is it?" i reckon i shook like a leaf, and i didn't know hardly what to do.  but i says: "please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.  if i'm in the way here, i'll--" "no, you won't.  set down and stay where you are.  i ain't going to hurt you, and i ain't going to tell on you, nuther.  you just tell me your secret, and trust me.  i'll keep it; and, what's more, i'll help you. so'll my old man if you want him to.  you see, you're a runaway 'prentice, that's all.  it ain't anything.  there ain't no harm in it. you've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut.  bless you, child, i wouldn't tell on you.  tell me all about it now, that's a good boy." so i said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer, and i would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn't go back on her promise.  then i told her my father and mother was dead, and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river, and he treated me so bad i couldn't stand it no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so i took my chance and stole some of his daughter's old clothes and cleared out, and i had been three nights coming the thirty miles.  i traveled nights, and hid daytimes and slept, and the bag of bread and meat i carried from home lasted me all the way, and i had a-plenty.  i said i believed my uncle abner moore would take care of me, and so that was why i struck out for this town of goshen. "goshen, child?  this ain't goshen.  this is st. petersburg.  goshen's ten mile further up the river.  who told you this was goshen?" "why, a man i met at daybreak this morning, just as i was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep.  he told me when the roads forked i must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to goshen." "he was drunk, i reckon.  he told you just exactly wrong." "well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter now.  i got to be moving along.  i'll fetch goshen before daylight." "hold on a minute.  i'll put you up a snack to eat.  you might want it." so she put me up a snack, and says: "say, when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up first?  answer up prompt now--don't stop to study over it.  which end gets up first?" "the hind end, mum." "well, then, a horse?" "the for'rard end, mum." "which side of a tree does the moss grow on?" "north side." "if fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them eats with their heads pointed the same direction?" "the whole fifteen, mum." "well, i reckon you _have_ lived in the country.  i thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again.  what's your real name, now?" "george peters, mum." "well, try to remember it, george.  don't forget and tell me it's elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it's george elexander when i catch you.  and don't go about women in that old calico.  you do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.  bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it; that's the way a woman most always does, but a man always does t'other way.  and when you throw at a rat or anything, hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can, and miss your rat about six or seven foot. throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to turn on, like a girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with your arm out to one side, like a boy.  and, mind you, when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don't clap them together, the way you did when you catched the lump of lead.  why, i spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and i contrived the other things just to make certain.  now trot along to your uncle, sarah mary williams george elexander peters, and if you get into trouble you send word to mrs. judith loftus, which is me, and i'll do what i can to get you out of it.  keep the river road all the way, and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you. the river road's a rocky one, and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to goshen, i reckon." i went up the bank about fifty yards, and then i doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below the house.  i jumped in, and was off in a hurry.  i went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island, and then started across.  i took off the sun-bonnet, for i didn't want no blinders on then.  when i was about the middle i heard the clock begin to strike, so i stops and listens; the sound come faint over the water but clear--eleven.  when i struck the head of the island i never waited to blow, though i was most winded, but i shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot. then i jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half below, as hard as i could go.  i landed, and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern.  there jim laid, sound asleep on the ground.  i roused him out and says: "git up and hump yourself, jim!  there ain't a minute to lose.  they're after us!" jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared.  by that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid.  we put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn't show a candle outside after that. i took the canoe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look; but if there was a boat around i couldn't see it, for stars and shadows ain't good to see by.  then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the shade, past the foot of the island dead still--never saying a word. chapter xii. it must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow.  if a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the illinois shore; and it was well a boat didn't come, for we hadn't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat.  we was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things.  it warn't good judgment to put _everything_ on the raft. if the men went to the island i just expect they found the camp fire i built, and watched it all night for jim to come.  anyways, they stayed away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn't no fault of mine.  i played it as low down on them as i could. when the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a big bend on the illinois side, and hacked off cottonwood branches with the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank there.  a tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth. we had mountains on the missouri shore and heavy timber on the illinois side, and the channel was down the missouri shore at that place, so we warn't afraid of anybody running across us.  we laid there all day, and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the missouri shore, and up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle.  i told jim all about the time i had jabbering with that woman; and jim said she was a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she wouldn't set down and watch a camp fire--no, sir, she'd fetch a dog.  well, then, i said, why couldn't she tell her husband to fetch a dog?  jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time, or else we wouldn't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village--no, indeedy, we would be in that same old town again.  so i said i didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long as they didn't. when it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in sight; so jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things dry. jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves.  right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen.  we made an extra steering-oar, too, because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something. we fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on, because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a "crossing"; for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks being still a little under water; so up-bound boats didn't always run the channel, but hunted easy water. this second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a current that was making over four mile an hour.  we catched fish and talked, and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness.  it was kind of solemn, drifting down the big, still river, laying on our backs looking up at the stars, and we didn't ever feel like talking loud, and it warn't often that we laughed--only a little kind of a low chuckle.  we had mighty good weather as a general thing, and nothing ever happened to us at all--that night, nor the next, nor the next. every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hillsides, nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see.  the fifth night we passed st. louis, and it was like the whole world lit up. in st. petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in st. louis, but i never believed it till i see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night.  there warn't a sound there; everybody was asleep. every night now i used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat; and sometimes i lifted a chicken that warn't roosting comfortable, and took him along.  pap always said, take a chicken when you get a chance, because if you don't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does, and a good deed ain't ever forgot.  i never see pap when he didn't want the chicken himself, but that is what he used to say, anyway. mornings before daylight i slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of that kind.  pap always said it warn't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't anything but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it.  jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we wouldn't borrow them any more--then he reckoned it wouldn't be no harm to borrow the others.  so we talked it over all one night, drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons, or the cantelopes, or the mushmelons, or what.  but towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and concluded to drop crabapples and p'simmons.  we warn't feeling just right before that, but it was all comfortable now.  i was glad the way it come out, too, because crabapples ain't ever good, and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet. we shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or didn't go to bed early enough in the evening.  take it all round, we lived pretty high. the fifth night below st. louis we had a big storm after midnight, with a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid sheet. we stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself. when the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead, and high, rocky bluffs on both sides.  by and by says i, "hel-_lo_, jim, looky yonder!" it was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.  we was drifting straight down for her.  the lightning showed her very distinct.  she was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it, when the flashes come. well, it being away in the night and stormy, and all so mysterious-like, i felt just the way any other boy would a felt when i see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river.  i wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little, and see what there was there.  so i says: "le's land on her, jim." but jim was dead against it at first.  he says: "i doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.  we's doin' blame' well, en we better let blame' well alone, as de good book says.  like as not dey's a watchman on dat wrack." "watchman your grandmother," i says; "there ain't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when it's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?"  jim couldn't say nothing to that, so he didn't try.  "and besides," i says, "we might borrow something worth having out of the captain's stateroom.  seegars, i bet you--and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.  steamboat captains is always rich, and get sixty dollars a month, and _they_ don't care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.  stick a candle in your pocket; i can't rest, jim, till we give her a rummaging.  do you reckon tom sawyer would ever go by this thing?  not for pie, he wouldn't. he'd call it an adventure--that's what he'd call it; and he'd land on that wreck if it was his last act.  and wouldn't he throw style into it?--wouldn't he spread himself, nor nothing?  why, you'd think it was christopher c'lumbus discovering kingdom-come.  i wish tom sawyer _was_ here." jim he grumbled a little, but give in.  he said we mustn't talk any more than we could help, and then talk mighty low.  the lightning showed us the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and made fast there. the deck was high out here.  we went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling our way slow with our feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so dark we couldn't see no sign of them.  pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain's door, which was open, and by jimminy, away down through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder! jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and told me to come along.  i says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but just then i heard a voice wail out and say: "oh, please don't, boys; i swear i won't ever tell!" another voice said, pretty loud: "it's a lie, jim turner.  you've acted this way before.  you always want more'n your share of the truck, and you've always got it, too, because you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell.  but this time you've said it jest one time too many.  you're the meanest, treacherousest hound in this country." by this time jim was gone for the raft.  i was just a-biling with curiosity; and i says to myself, tom sawyer wouldn't back out now, and so i won't either; i'm a-going to see what's going on here.  so i dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft in the dark till there warn't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas.  then in there i see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.  this one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on the floor, and saying: "i'd _like_ to!  and i orter, too--a mean skunk!" the man on the floor would shrivel up and say, "oh, please don't, bill; i hain't ever goin' to tell." and every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say: "'deed you _ain't!_  you never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet you." and once he said:  "hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the best of him and tied him he'd a killed us both.  and what _for_?  jist for noth'n. jist because we stood on our _rights_--that's what for.  but i lay you ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, jim turner.  put _up_ that pistol, bill." bill says: "i don't want to, jake packard.  i'm for killin' him--and didn't he kill old hatfield jist the same way--and don't he deserve it?" "but i don't _want_ him killed, and i've got my reasons for it." "bless yo' heart for them words, jake packard!  i'll never forgit you long's i live!" says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering. packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where i was there in the dark, and motioned bill to come.  i crawfished as fast as i could about two yards, but the boat slanted so that i couldn't make very good time; so to keep from getting run over and catched i crawled into a stateroom on the upper side.  the man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when packard got to my stateroom, he says: "here--come in here." and in he come, and bill after him.  but before they got in i was up in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry i come.  then they stood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked.  i couldn't see them, but i could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been having.  i was glad i didn't drink whisky; but it wouldn't made much difference anyway, because most of the time they couldn't a treed me because i didn't breathe.  i was too scared.  and, besides, a body _couldn't_ breathe and hear such talk.  they talked low and earnest.  bill wanted to kill turner.  he says: "he's said he'll tell, and he will.  if we was to give both our shares to him _now_ it wouldn't make no difference after the row and the way we've served him.  shore's you're born, he'll turn state's evidence; now you hear _me_.  i'm for putting him out of his troubles." "so'm i," says packard, very quiet. "blame it, i'd sorter begun to think you wasn't.  well, then, that's all right.  le's go and do it." "hold on a minute; i hain't had my say yit.  you listen to me. shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's _got_ to be done. but what i say is this:  it ain't good sense to go court'n around after a halter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's jist as good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks.  ain't that so?" "you bet it is.  but how you goin' to manage it this time?" "well, my idea is this:  we'll rustle around and gather up whatever pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for shore and hide the truck. then we'll wait.  now i say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river.  see? he'll be drownded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own self.  i reckon that's a considerble sight better 'n killin' of him.  i'm unfavorable to killin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it; it ain't good sense, it ain't good morals.  ain't i right?" "yes, i reck'n you are.  but s'pose she _don't_ break up and wash off?" "well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can't we?" "all right, then; come along." so they started, and i lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled forward. it was dark as pitch there; but i said, in a kind of a coarse whisper, "jim!" and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a moan, and i says: "quick, jim, it ain't no time for fooling around and moaning; there's a gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these fellows can't get away from the wreck there's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix.  but if we find their boat we can put _all_ of 'em in a bad fix--for the sheriff 'll get 'em. quick--hurry!  i'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. you start at the raft, and--" "oh, my lordy, lordy!  _raf'_?  dey ain' no raf' no mo'; she done broke loose en gone i--en here we is!" chapter xiii. well, i catched my breath and most fainted.  shut up on a wreck with such a gang as that!  but it warn't no time to be sentimentering.  we'd _got_ to find that boat now--had to have it for ourselves.  so we went a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side, and slow work it was, too--seemed a week before we got to the stern.  no sign of a boat.  jim said he didn't believe he could go any further--so scared he hadn't hardly any strength left, he said.  but i said, come on, if we get left on this wreck we are in a fix, sure.  so on we prowled again.  we struck for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the edge of the skylight was in the water.  when we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the skiff, sure enough!  i could just barely see her.  i felt ever so thankful.  in another second i would a been aboard of her, but just then the door opened.  one of the men stuck his head out only about a couple of foot from me, and i thought i was gone; but he jerked it in again, and says: "heave that blame lantern out o' sight, bill!" he flung a bag of something into the boat, and then got in himself and set down.  it was packard.  then bill _he_ come out and got in.  packard says, in a low voice: "all ready--shove off!" i couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, i was so weak.  but bill says: "hold on--'d you go through him?" "no.  didn't you?" "no.  so he's got his share o' the cash yet." "well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money." "say, won't he suspicion what we're up to?" "maybe he won't.  but we got to have it anyway. come along." so they got out and went in. the door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half second i was in the boat, and jim come tumbling after me.  i out with my knife and cut the rope, and away we went! we didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whisper, nor hardly even breathe.  we went gliding swift along, dead silent, past the tip of the paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the wreck, and the darkness soaked her up, every last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it. when we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed by that that the rascals had missed their boat, and was beginning to understand that they was in just as much trouble now as jim turner was. then jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.  now was the first time that i begun to worry about the men--i reckon i hadn't had time to before.  i begun to think how dreadful it was, even for murderers, to be in such a fix.  i says to myself, there ain't no telling but i might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how would i like it?  so says i to jim: "the first light we see we'll land a hundred yards below it or above it, in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff, and then i'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of their scrape, so they can be hung when their time comes." but that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again, and this time worse than ever.  the rain poured down, and never a light showed; everybody in bed, i reckon.  we boomed along down the river, watching for lights and watching for our raft.  after a long time the rain let up, but the clouds stayed, and the lightning kept whimpering, and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and we made for it. it was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.  we seen a light now away down to the right, on shore.  so i said i would go for it. the skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole there on the wreck.  we hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and i told jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone about two mile, and keep it burning till i come; then i manned my oars and shoved for the light.  as i got down towards it three or four more showed--up on a hillside.  it was a village.  i closed in above the shore light, and laid on my oars and floated.  as i went by i see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat.  i skimmed around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and by and by i found him roosting on the bitts forward, with his head down between his knees.  i gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and begun to cry. he stirred up in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only me he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says: "hello, what's up?  don't cry, bub.  what's the trouble?" i says: "pap, and mam, and sis, and--" then i broke down.  he says: "oh, dang it now, _don't_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles, and this 'n 'll come out all right.  what's the matter with 'em?" "they're--they're--are you the watchman of the boat?" "yes," he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like.  "i'm the captain and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head deck-hand; and sometimes i'm the freight and passengers.  i ain't as rich as old jim hornback, and i can't be so blame' generous and good to tom, dick, and harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he does; but i've told him a many a time 't i wouldn't trade places with him; for, says i, a sailor's life's the life for me, and i'm derned if _i'd_ live two mile out o' town, where there ain't nothing ever goin' on, not for all his spondulicks and as much more on top of it.  says i--" i broke in and says: "they're in an awful peck of trouble, and--" "_who_ is?" "why, pap and mam and sis and miss hooker; and if you'd take your ferryboat and go up there--" "up where?  where are they?" "on the wreck." "what wreck?" "why, there ain't but one." "what, you don't mean the walter scott?" "yes." "good land! what are they doin' _there_, for gracious sakes?" "well, they didn't go there a-purpose." "i bet they didn't!  why, great goodness, there ain't no chance for 'em if they don't git off mighty quick!  why, how in the nation did they ever git into such a scrape?" "easy enough.  miss hooker was a-visiting up there to the town--" "yes, booth's landing--go on." "she was a-visiting there at booth's landing, and