just in the edge of the evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry to stay all night at her friend's house, miss what-you-may-call-her i disremember her name--and they lost their steering-oar, and swung around and went a-floating down, stern first, about two mile, and saddle-baggsed on the wreck, and the ferryman and the nigger woman and the horses was all lost, but miss hooker she made a grab and got aboard the wreck.  well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our trading-scow, and it was so dark we didn't notice the wreck till we was right on it; and so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but bill whipple--and oh, he _was_ the best cretur!--i most wish 't it had been me, i do." "my george!  it's the beatenest thing i ever struck.  and _then_ what did you all do?" "well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there we couldn't make nobody hear.  so pap said somebody got to get ashore and get help somehow. i was the only one that could swim, so i made a dash for it, and miss hooker she said if i didn't strike help sooner, come here and hunt up her uncle, and he'd fix the thing.  i made the land about a mile below, and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do something, but they said, 'what, in such a night and such a current? there ain't no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.'  now if you'll go and--" "by jackson, i'd _like_ to, and, blame it, i don't know but i will; but who in the dingnation's a-going' to _pay_ for it?  do you reckon your pap--" "why _that's_ all right.  miss hooker she tole me, _particular_, that her uncle hornback--" "great guns! is _he_ her uncle?  looky here, you break for that light over yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tavern; tell 'em to dart you out to jim hornback's, and he'll foot the bill.  and don't you fool around any, because he'll want to know the news.  tell him i'll have his niece all safe before he can get to town.  hump yourself, now; i'm a-going up around the corner here to roust out my engineer." i struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner i went back and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in the easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked myself in among some woodboats; for i couldn't rest easy till i could see the ferryboat start. but take it all around, i was feeling ruther comfortable on accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would a done it.  i wished the widow knowed about it.  i judged she would be proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most interest in. well, before long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along down! a kind of cold shiver went through me, and then i struck out for her.  she was very deep, and i see in a minute there warn't much chance for anybody being alive in her.  i pulled all around her and hollered a little, but there wasn't any answer; all dead still.  i felt a little bit heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for i reckoned if they could stand it i could. then here comes the ferryboat; so i shoved for the middle of the river on a long down-stream slant; and when i judged i was out of eye-reach i laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the wreck for miss hooker's remainders, because the captain would know her uncle hornback would want them; and then pretty soon the ferryboat give it up and went for the shore, and i laid into my work and went a-booming down the river. it did seem a powerful long time before jim's light showed up; and when it did show it looked like it was a thousand mile off.  by the time i got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned in and slept like dead people. chapter xiv. by and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three boxes of seegars.  we hadn't ever been this rich before in neither of our lives.  the seegars was prime.  we laid off all the afternoon in the woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good time. i told jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the ferryboat, and i said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said he didn't want no more adventures.  he said that when i went in the texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he nearly died, because he judged it was all up with _him_ anyway it could be fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drownded; and if he did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get the reward, and then miss watson would sell him south, sure.  well, he was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a nigger. i read considerable to jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on, 'stead of mister; and jim's eyes bugged out, and he was interested.  he says: "i didn' know dey was so many un um.  i hain't hearn 'bout none un um, skasely, but ole king sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat's in a pack er k'yards.  how much do a king git?" "get?"  i says; "why, they get a thousand dollars a month if they want it; they can have just as much as they want; everything belongs to them." "_ain'_ dat gay?  en what dey got to do, huck?" "_they_ don't do nothing!  why, how you talk! they just set around." "no; is dat so?" "of course it is.  they just set around--except, maybe, when there's a war; then they go to the war.  but other times they just lazy around; or go hawking--just hawking and sp--sh!--d' you hear a noise?" we skipped out and looked; but it warn't nothing but the flutter of a steamboat's wheel away down, coming around the point; so we come back. "yes," says i, "and other times, when things is dull, they fuss with the parlyment; and if everybody don't go just so he whacks their heads off. but mostly they hang round the harem." "roun' de which?" "harem." "what's de harem?" "the place where he keeps his wives.  don't you know about the harem? solomon had one; he had about a million wives." "why, yes, dat's so; i--i'd done forgot it.  a harem's a bo'd'n-house, i reck'n.  mos' likely dey has rackety times in de nussery.  en i reck'n de wives quarrels considable; en dat 'crease de racket.  yit dey say sollermun de wises' man dat ever live'.  i doan' take no stock in dat. bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a blim-blammin' all de time?  no--'deed he wouldn't.  a wise man 'ud take en buil' a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry when he want to res'." "well, but he _was_ the wisest man, anyway; because the widow she told me so, her own self." "i doan k'yer what de widder say, he _warn't_ no wise man nuther.  he had some er de dad-fetchedes' ways i ever see.  does you know 'bout dat chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?" "yes, the widow told me all about it." "_well_, den!  warn' dat de beatenes' notion in de worl'?  you jes' take en look at it a minute.  dah's de stump, dah--dat's one er de women; heah's you--dat's de yuther one; i's sollermun; en dish yer dollar bill's de chile.  bofe un you claims it.  what does i do?  does i shin aroun' mongs' de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b'long to, en han' it over to de right one, all safe en soun', de way dat anybody dat had any gumption would?  no; i take en whack de bill in _two_, en give half un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman.  dat's de way sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.  now i want to ast you:  what's de use er dat half a bill?--can't buy noth'n wid it.  en what use is a half a chile?  i wouldn' give a dern for a million un um." "but hang it, jim, you've clean missed the point--blame it, you've missed it a thousand mile." "who?  me?  go 'long.  doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.  i reck'n i knows sense when i sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as dat. de 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile wid a half a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain.  doan' talk to me 'bout sollermun, huck, i knows him by de back." "but i tell you you don't get the point." "blame de point!  i reck'n i knows what i knows.  en mine you, de _real_ pint is down furder--it's down deeper.  it lays in de way sollermun was raised.  you take a man dat's got on'y one or two chillen; is dat man gwyne to be waseful o' chillen?  no, he ain't; he can't 'ford it.  _he_ know how to value 'em.  but you take a man dat's got 'bout five million chillen runnin' roun' de house, en it's diffunt.  _he_ as soon chop a chile in two as a cat. dey's plenty mo'.  a chile er two, mo' er less, warn't no consekens to sollermun, dad fatch him!" i never see such a nigger.  if he got a notion in his head once, there warn't no getting it out again.  he was the most down on solomon of any nigger i ever see.  so i went to talking about other kings, and let solomon slide.  i told about louis sixteenth that got his head cut off in france long time ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that would a been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some say he died there. "po' little chap." "but some says he got out and got away, and come to america." "dat's good!  but he'll be pooty lonesome--dey ain' no kings here, is dey, huck?" "no." "den he cain't git no situation.  what he gwyne to do?" "well, i don't know.  some of them gets on the police, and some of them learns people how to talk french." "why, huck, doan' de french people talk de same way we does?" "_no_, jim; you couldn't understand a word they said--not a single word." "well, now, i be ding-busted!  how do dat come?" "i don't know; but it's so.  i got some of their jabber out of a book. s'pose a man was to come to you and say polly-voo-franzy--what would you think?" "i wouldn' think nuff'n; i'd take en bust him over de head--dat is, if he warn't white.  i wouldn't 'low no nigger to call me dat." "shucks, it ain't calling you anything.  it's only saying, do you know how to talk french?" "well, den, why couldn't he _say_ it?" "why, he _is_ a-saying it.  that's a frenchman's _way_ of saying it." "well, it's a blame ridicklous way, en i doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout it.  dey ain' no sense in it." "looky here, jim; does a cat talk like we do?" "no, a cat don't." "well, does a cow?" "no, a cow don't, nuther." "does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?" "no, dey don't." "it's natural and right for 'em to talk different from each other, ain't it?" "course." "and ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk different from _us_?" "why, mos' sholy it is." "well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a _frenchman_ to talk different from us?  you answer me that." "is a cat a man, huck?" "no." "well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.  is a cow a man?--er is a cow a cat?" "no, she ain't either of them." "well, den, she ain't got no business to talk like either one er the yuther of 'em.  is a frenchman a man?" "yes." "_well_, den!  dad blame it, why doan' he _talk_ like a man?  you answer me _dat_!" i see it warn't no use wasting words--you can't learn a nigger to argue. so i quit. chapter xv. we judged that three nights more would fetch us to cairo, at the bottom of illinois, where the ohio river comes in, and that was what we was after.  we would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the ohio amongst the free states, and then be out of trouble. well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for a towhead to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog; but when i paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn't anything but little saplings to tie to.  i passed the line around one of them right on the edge of the cut bank, but there was a stiff current, and the raft come booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away she went.  i see the fog closing down, and it made me so sick and scared i couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me--and then there warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards.  i jumped into the canoe and run back to the stern, and grabbed the paddle and set her back a stroke.  but she didn't come.  i was in such a hurry i hadn't untied her.  i got up and tried to untie her, but i was so excited my hands shook so i couldn't hardly do anything with them. as soon as i got started i took out after the raft, hot and heavy, right down the towhead.  that was all right as far as it went, but the towhead warn't sixty yards long, and the minute i flew by the foot of it i shot out into the solid white fog, and hadn't no more idea which way i was going than a dead man. thinks i, it won't do to paddle; first i know i'll run into the bank or a towhead or something; i got to set still and float, and yet it's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time.  i whooped and listened.  away down there somewheres i hears a small whoop, and up comes my spirits.  i went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it again.  the next time it come i see i warn't heading for it, but heading away to the right of it.  and the next time i was heading away to the left of it--and not gaining on it much either, for i was flying around, this way and that and t'other, but it was going straight ahead all the time. i did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops that was making the trouble for me.  well, i fought along, and directly i hears the whoop _behind_ me.  i was tangled good now.  that was somebody else's whoop, or else i was turned around. i throwed the paddle down.  i heard the whoop again; it was behind me yet, but in a different place; it kept coming, and kept changing its place, and i kept answering, till by and by it was in front of me again, and i knowed the current had swung the canoe's head down-stream, and i was all right if that was jim and not some other raftsman hollering.  i couldn't tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look natural nor sound natural in a fog. the whooping went on, and in about a minute i come a-booming down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the current throwed me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared, the currrent was tearing by them so swift. in another second or two it was solid white and still again.  i set perfectly still then, listening to my heart thump, and i reckon i didn't draw a breath while it thumped a hundred. i just give up then.  i knowed what the matter was.  that cut bank was an island, and jim had gone down t'other side of it.  it warn't no towhead that you could float by in ten minutes.  it had the big timber of a regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than half a mile wide. i kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, i reckon.  i was floating along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don't ever think of that.  no, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still on the water; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to yourself how fast _you're_ going, but you catch your breath and think, my! how that snag's tearing along.  if you think it ain't dismal and lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in the night, you try it once--you'll see. next, for about a half an hour, i whoops now and then; at last i hears the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it, but i couldn't do it, and directly i judged i'd got into a nest of towheads, for i had little dim glimpses of them on both sides of me--sometimes just a narrow channel between, and some that i couldn't see i knowed was there because i'd hear the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash that hung over the banks.  well, i warn't long loosing the whoops down amongst the towheads; and i only tried to chase them a little while, anyway, because it was worse than chasing a jack-o'-lantern.  you never knowed a sound dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so much. i had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so i judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now and then, or else it would get further ahead and clear out of hearing--it was floating a little faster than what i was. well, i seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but i couldn't hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.  i reckoned jim had fetched up on a snag, maybe, and it was all up with him.  i was good and tired, so i laid down in the canoe and said i wouldn't bother no more.  i didn't want to go to sleep, of course; but i was so sleepy i couldn't help it; so i thought i would take jest one little cat-nap. but i reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when i waked up the stars was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and i was spinning down a big bend stern first.  first i didn't know where i was; i thought i was dreaming; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come up dim out of last week. it was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the thickest kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as i could see by the stars.  i looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the water. i took after it; but when i got to it it warn't nothing but a couple of sawlogs made fast together.  then i see another speck, and chased that; then another, and this time i was right.  it was the raft. when i got to it jim was setting there with his head down between his knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar.  the other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and branches and dirt.  so she'd had a rough time. i made fast and laid down under jim's nose on the raft, and began to gap, and stretch my fists out against jim, and says: "hello, jim, have i been asleep?  why didn't you stir me up?" "goodness gracious, is dat you, huck?  en you ain' dead--you ain' drownded--you's back agin?  it's too good for true, honey, it's too good for true. lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you.  no, you ain' dead! you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole huck--de same ole huck, thanks to goodness!" "what's the matter with you, jim?  you been a-drinking?" "drinkin'?  has i ben a-drinkin'?  has i had a chance to be a-drinkin'?" "well, then, what makes you talk so wild?" "how does i talk wild?" "_how_?  why, hain't you been talking about my coming back, and all that stuff, as if i'd been gone away?" "huck--huck finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.  _hain't_ you ben gone away?" "gone away?  why, what in the nation do you mean?  i hain't been gone anywheres.  where would i go to?" "well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.  is i _me_, or who _is_ i? is i heah, or whah _is_ i?  now dat's what i wants to know." "well, i think you're here, plain enough, but i think you're a tangle-headed old fool, jim." "i is, is i?  well, you answer me dis:  didn't you tote out de line in de canoe fer to make fas' to de tow-head?" "no, i didn't.  what tow-head?  i hain't see no tow-head." "you hain't seen no towhead?  looky here, didn't de line pull loose en de raf' go a-hummin' down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in de fog?" "what fog?" "why, de fog!--de fog dat's been aroun' all night.  en didn't you whoop, en didn't i whoop, tell we got mix' up in de islands en one un us got los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los', 'kase he didn' know whah he wuz? en didn't i bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible time en mos' git drownded?  now ain' dat so, boss--ain't it so?  you answer me dat." "well, this is too many for me, jim.  i hain't seen no fog, nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing.  i been setting here talking with you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and i reckon i done the same.  you couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course you've been dreaming." "dad fetch it, how is i gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?" "well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't any of it happen." "but, huck, it's all jis' as plain to me as--" "it don't make no difference how plain it is; there ain't nothing in it. i know, because i've been here all the time." jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there studying over it.  then he says: "well, den, i reck'n i did dream it, huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't de powerfullest dream i ever see.  en i hain't ever had no dream b'fo' dat's tired me like dis one." "oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body like everything sometimes.  but this one was a staving dream; tell me all about it, jim." so jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as it happened, only he painted it up considerable.  then he said he must start in and "'terpret" it, because it was sent for a warning.  he said the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but the current was another man that would get us away from him.  the whoops was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't try hard to make out to understand them they'd just take us into bad luck, 'stead of keeping us out of it.  the lot of towheads was troubles we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear river, which was the free states, and wouldn't have no more trouble. it had clouded up pretty dark just after i got on to the raft, but it was clearing up again now. "oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, jim," i says; "but what does _these_ things stand for?" it was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar.  you could see them first-rate now. jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash again.  he had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place again right away.  but when he did get the thing straightened around he looked at me steady without ever smiling, and says: "what do dey stan' for?  i'se gwyne to tell you.  when i got all wore out wid work, en wid de callin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en i didn' k'yer no' mo' what become er me en de raf'.  en when i wake up en fine you back agin, all safe en soun', de tears come, en i could a got down on my knees en kiss yo' foot, i's so thankful. en all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could make a fool uv ole jim wid a lie.  dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em ashamed." then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam, and went in there without saying anything but that.  but that was enough.  it made me feel so mean i could almost kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back. it was fifteen minutes before i could work myself up to go and humble myself to a nigger; but i done it, and i warn't ever sorry for it afterwards, neither.  i didn't do him no more mean tricks, and i wouldn't done that one if i'd a knowed it would make him feel that way. chapter xvi. we slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways behind a monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession.  she had four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as thirty men, likely.  she had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart, and an open camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end.  there was a power of style about her.  it _amounted_ to something being a raftsman on such a craft as that. we went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got hot.  the river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light.  we talked about cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it.  i said likely we wouldn't, because i had heard say there warn't but about a dozen houses there, and if they didn't happen to have them lit up, how was we going to know we was passing a town?  jim said if the two big rivers joined together there, that would show.  but i said maybe we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old river again. that disturbed jim--and me too.  so the question was, what to do?  i said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed, and tell them pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, and was a green hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to cairo.  jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited. there warn't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and not pass it without seeing it.  he said he'd be mighty sure to see it, because he'd be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it he'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom.  every little while he jumps up and says: "dah she is?" but it warn't.  it was jack-o'-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set down again, and went to watching, same as before.  jim said it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom.  well, i can tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish, too, to hear him, because i begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free--and who was to blame for it?  why, _me_.  i couldn't get that out of my conscience, no how nor no way. it got to troubling me so i couldn't rest; i couldn't stay still in one place.  it hadn't ever come home to me before, what this thing was that i was doing.  but now it did; and it stayed with me, and scorched me more and more.  i tried to make out to myself that i warn't to blame, because i didn't run jim off from his rightful owner; but it warn't no use, conscience up and says, every time, "but you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a paddled ashore and told somebody."  that was so--i couldn't get around that noway.  that was where it pinched.  conscience says to me, "what had poor miss watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never say one single word?  what did that poor old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean?  why, she tried to learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to be good to you every way she knowed how.  _that's_ what she done." i got to feeling so mean and so miserable i most wished i was dead.  i fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and jim was fidgeting up and down past me.  we neither of us could keep still.  every time he danced around and says, "dah's cairo!" it went through me like a shot, and i thought if it _was_ cairo i reckoned i would die of miserableness. jim talked out loud all the time while i was talking to myself.  he was saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free state he would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent, and when he got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to where miss watson lived; and then they would both work to buy the two children, and if their master wouldn't sell them, they'd get an ab'litionist to go and steal them. it most froze me to hear such talk.  he wouldn't ever dared to talk such talk in his life before.  just see what a difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about free.  it was according to the old saying, "give a nigger an inch and he'll take an ell."  thinks i, this is what comes of my not thinking.  here was this nigger, which i had as good as helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying he would steal his children--children that belonged to a man i didn't even know; a man that hadn't ever done me no harm. i was sorry to hear jim say that, it was such a lowering of him.  my conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last i says to it, "let up on me--it ain't too late yet--i'll paddle ashore at the first light and tell."  i felt easy and happy and light as a feather right off.  all my troubles was gone.  i went to looking out sharp for a light, and sort of singing to myself.  by and by one showed.  jim sings out: "we's safe, huck, we's safe!  jump up and crack yo' heels!  dat's de good ole cairo at las', i jis knows it!" i says: "i'll take the canoe and go and see, jim.  it mightn't be, you know." he jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the bottom for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as i shoved off, he says: "pooty soon i'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en i'll say, it's all on accounts o' huck; i's a free man, en i couldn't ever ben free ef it hadn' ben for huck; huck done it.  jim won't ever forgit you, huck; you's de bes' fren' jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole jim's got now." i was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me.  i went along slow then, and i warn't right down certain whether i was glad i started or whether i warn't.  when i was fifty yards off, jim says: "dah you goes, de ole true huck; de on'y white genlman dat ever kep' his promise to ole jim." well, i just felt sick.  but i says, i _got_ to do it--i can't get _out_ of it.  right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and they stopped and i stopped.  one of them says: "what's that yonder?" "a piece of a raft," i says. "do you belong on it?" "yes, sir." "any men on it?" "only one, sir." "well, there's five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above the head of the bend.  is your man white or black?" i didn't answer up prompt.  i tried to, but the words wouldn't come. i tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but i warn't man enough--hadn't the spunk of a rabbit.  i see i was weakening; so i just give up trying, and up and says: "he's white." "i reckon we'll go and see for ourselves." "i wish you would," says i, "because it's pap that's there, and maybe you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is.  he's sick--and so is mam and mary ann." "oh, the devil! we're in a hurry, boy.  but i s'pose we've got to.  come, buckle to your paddle, and let's get along." i buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.  when we had made a stroke or two, i says: "pap'll be mighty much obleeged to you, i can tell you.  everybody goes away when i want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and i can't do it by myself." "well, that's infernal mean.  odd, too.  say, boy, what's the matter with your father?" "it's the--a--the--well, it ain't anything much." they stopped pulling.  it warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft now. one says: "boy, that's a lie.  what _is_ the matter with your pap?  answer up square now, and it'll be the better for you." "i will, sir, i will, honest--but don't leave us, please.  it's the--the--gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the headline, you won't have to come a-near the raft--please do." "set her back, john, set her back!" says one.  they backed water.  "keep away, boy--keep to looard.  confound it, i just expect the wind has blowed it to us.  your pap's got the small-pox, and you know it precious well.  why didn't you come out and say so?  do you want to spread it all over?" "well," says i, a-blubbering, "i've told everybody before, and they just went away and left us." "poor devil, there's something in that.  we are right down sorry for you, but we--well, hang it, we don't want the small-pox, you see.  look here, i'll tell you what to do.  don't you try to land by yourself, or you'll smash everything to pieces.  you float along down about twenty miles, and you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river.  it will be long after sun-up then, and when you ask for help you tell them your folks are all down with chills and fever.  don't be a fool again, and let people guess what is the matter.  now we're trying to do you a kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy.  it wouldn't do any good to land yonder where the light is--it's only a wood-yard. say, i reckon your father's poor, and i'm bound to say he's in pretty hard luck.  here, i'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this board, and you get it when it floats by.  i feel mighty mean to leave you; but my kingdom! it won't do to fool with small-pox, don't you see?" "hold on, parker," says the other man, "here's a twenty to put on the board for me.  good-bye, boy; you do as mr. parker told you, and you'll be all right." "that's so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.  if you see any runaway niggers you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it." "good-bye, sir," says i; "i won't let no runaway niggers get by me if i can help it." they went off and i got aboard the raft, feeling bad and low, because i knowed very well i had done wrong, and i see it warn't no use for me to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get _started_ right when he's little ain't got no show--when the pinch comes there ain't nothing to back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat.  then i thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right and give jim up, would you felt better than what you do now?  no, says i, i'd feel bad--i'd feel just the same way i do now.  well, then, says i, what's the use you learning to do right when it's troublesome to do right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?  i was stuck.  i couldn't answer that.  so i reckoned i wouldn't bother no more about it, but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time. i went into the wigwam; jim warn't there.  i looked all around; he warn't anywhere.  i says: "jim!" "here i is, huck.  is dey out o' sight yit?  don't talk loud." he was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out.  i told him they were out of sight, so he come aboard.  he says: "i was a-listenin' to all de talk, en i slips into de river en was gwyne to shove for sho' if dey come aboard.  den i was gwyne to swim to de raf' agin when dey was gone.  but lawsy, how you did fool 'em, huck!  dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge!  i tell you, chile, i'spec it save' ole jim--ole jim ain't going to forgit you for dat, honey." then we talked about the money.  it was a pretty good raise--twenty dollars apiece.  jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free states. he said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he wished we was already there. towards daybreak we tied up, and jim was mighty particular about hiding the raft good.  then he worked all day fixing things in bundles, and getting all ready to quit rafting. that night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down in a left-hand bend. i went off in the canoe to ask about it.  pretty soon i found a man out in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line.  i ranged up and says: "mister, is that town cairo?" "cairo? no.  you must be a blame' fool." "what town is it, mister?" "if you want to know, go and find out.  if you stay here botherin' around me for about a half a minute longer you'll get something you won't want." i paddled to the raft.  jim was awful disappointed, but i said never mind, cairo would be the next place, i reckoned. we passed another town before daylight, and i was going out again; but it was high ground, so i didn't go.  no high ground about cairo, jim said. i had forgot it.  we laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to the left-hand bank.  i begun to suspicion something.  so did jim.  i says: "maybe we went by cairo in the fog that night." he says: "doan' le's talk about it, huck.  po' niggers can't have no luck.  i awluz 'spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work." "i wish i'd never seen that snake-skin, jim--i do wish i'd never laid eyes on it." "it ain't yo' fault, huck; you didn' know.  don't you blame yo'self 'bout it." when it was daylight, here was the clear ohio water inshore, sure enough, and outside was the old regular muddy!  so it was all up with cairo. we talked it all over.  it wouldn't do to take to the shore; we couldn't take the raft up the stream, of course.  there warn't no way but to wait for dark, and start back in the canoe and take the chances.  so we slept all day amongst the cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work, and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone! we didn't say a word for a good while.  there warn't anything to say.  we both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin; so what was the use to talk about it?  it would only look like we was finding fault, and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck--and keep on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep still. by and by we talked about what we better do, and found there warn't no way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in.  we warn't going to borrow it when there warn't anybody around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after us. so we shoved out after dark on the raft. anybody that don't believe yet that it's foolishness to handle a snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe it now if they read on and see what more it done for us. the place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.  but we didn't see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours and more.  well, the night got gray and ruther thick, which is the next meanest thing to fog.  you can't tell the shape of the river, and you can't see no distance. it got to be very late and still, and then along comes a steamboat up the river.  we lit the lantern, and judged she would see it.  up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us; they go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole river. we could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her good till she was close.  she aimed right for us.  often they do that and try to see how close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks he's mighty smart.  well, here she comes, and we said she was going to try and shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit.  she was a big one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right over us.  there was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the engines, a powwow of cussing, and whistling of steam--and as jim went overboard on one side and i on the other, she come smashing straight through the raft. i dived--and i aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel had got to go over me, and i wanted it to have plenty of room.  i could always stay under water a minute; this time i reckon i stayed under a minute and a half.  then i bounced for the top in a hurry, for i was nearly busting.  i popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of my nose, and puffed a bit.  of course there was a booming current; and of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped them, for they never cared much for raftsmen; so now she was churning along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though i could hear her. i sung out for jim about a dozen times, but i didn't get any answer; so i grabbed a plank that touched me while i was "treading water," and struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me.  but i made out to see that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which meant that i was in a crossing; so i changed off and went that way. it was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so i was a good long time in getting over.  i made a safe landing, and clumb up the bank. i couldn't see but a little ways, but i went poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then i run across a big old-fashioned double log-house before i noticed it.  i was going to rush by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and barking at me, and i knowed better than to move another peg. chapter xvii. in about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head out, and says: "be done, boys!  who's there?" i says: "it's me." "who's me?" "george jackson, sir." "what do you want?" "i don't want nothing, sir.  i only want to go along by, but the dogs won't let me." "what are you prowling around here this time of night for--hey?" "i warn't prowling around, sir, i fell overboard off of the steamboat." "oh, you did, did you?  strike a light there, somebody.  what did you say your name was?" "george jackson, sir.  i'm only a boy." "look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid--nobody'll hurt you.  but don't try to budge; stand right where you are.  rouse out bob and tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.  george jackson, is there anybody with you?" "no, sir, nobody." i heard the people stirring around in the house now, and see a light. the man sung out: "snatch that light away, betsy, you old fool--ain't you got any sense? put it on the floor behind the front door.  bob, if you and tom are ready, take your places." "all ready." "now, george jackson, do you know the shepherdsons?" "no, sir; i never heard of them." "well, that may be so, and it mayn't.  now, all ready.  step forward, george jackson.  and mind, don't you hurry--come mighty slow.  if there's anybody with you, let him keep back--if he shows himself he'll be shot. come along now.  come slow; push the door open yourself--just enough to squeeze in, d' you hear?" i didn't hurry; i couldn't if i'd a wanted to.  i took one slow step at a time and there warn't a sound, only i thought i could hear my heart.  the dogs were as still as the humans, but they followed a little behind me. when i got to the three log doorsteps i heard them unlocking and unbarring and unbolting.  i put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and a little more till somebody said, "there, that's enough--put your head in." i done it, but i judged they would take it off. the candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking at me, and me at them, for about a quarter of a minute:  three big men with guns pointed at me, which made me wince, i tell you; the oldest, gray and about sixty, the other two thirty or more--all of them fine and handsome--and the sweetest old gray-headed lady, and back of her two young women which i couldn't see right well.  the old gentleman says: "there; i reckon it's all right.  come in." as soon as i was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor, and got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front windows--there warn't none on the side.  they held the candle, and took a good look at me, and all said, "why, _he_ ain't a shepherdson--no, there ain't any shepherdson about him."  then the old man said he hoped i wouldn't mind being searched for arms, because he didn't mean no harm by it--it was only to make sure.  so he didn't pry into my pockets, but only felt outside with his hands, and said it was all right.  he told me to make myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old lady says: "why, bless you, saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be; and don't you reckon it may be he's hungry?" "true for you, rachel--i forgot." so the old lady says: "betsy" (this was a nigger woman), "you fly around and get him something to eat as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you girls go and wake up buck and tell him--oh, here he is himself.  buck, take this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours that's dry." buck looked about as old as me--thirteen or fourteen or along there, though he was a little bigger than me.  he hadn't on anything but a shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed.  he came in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes, and he was dragging a gun along with the other one. he says: "ain't they no shepherdsons around?" they said, no, 'twas a false alarm. "well," he says, "if they'd a ben some, i reckon i'd a got one." they all laughed, and bob says: "why, buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so slow in coming." "well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right i'm always kept down; i don't get no show." "never mind, buck, my boy," says the old man, "you'll have show enough, all in good time, don't you fret about that.  go 'long with you now, and do as your mother told you." when we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a roundabout and pants of his, and i put them on.  while i was at it he asked me what my name was, but before i could tell him he started to tell me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday, and he asked me where moses was when the candle went out.  i said i didn't know; i hadn't heard about it before, no way. "well, guess," he says. "how'm i going to guess," says i, "when i never heard tell of it before?" "but you can guess, can't you?  it's just as easy." "_which_ candle?"  i says. "why, any candle," he says. "i don't know where he was," says i; "where was he?" "why, he was in the _dark_!  that's where he was!" "well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?" "why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?  say, how long are you going to stay here?  you got to stay always.  we can just have booming times--they don't have no school now.  do you own a dog?  i've got a dog--and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in.  do you like to comb up sundays, and all that kind of foolishness?  you bet i don't, but ma she makes me.  confound these ole britches!  i reckon i'd better put 'em on, but i'd ruther not, it's so warm.  are you all ready? all right.  come along, old hoss." cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilk--that is what they had for me down there, and there ain't nothing better that ever i've come across yet.  buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes, except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women.  they all smoked and talked, and i eat and talked.  the young women had quilts around them, and their hair down their backs.  they all asked me questions, and i told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of arkansaw, and my sister mary ann run off and got married and never was heard of no more, and bill went to hunt them and he warn't heard of no more, and tom and mort died, and then there warn't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles; so when he died i took what there was left, because the farm didn't belong to us, and started up the river, deck passage, and fell overboard; and that was how i come to be here.  so they said i could have a home there as long as i wanted it.  then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed, and i went to bed with buck, and when i waked up in the morning, drat it all, i had forgot what my name was. so i laid there about an hour trying to think, and when buck waked up i says: "can you spell, buck?" "yes," he says. "i bet you can't spell my name," says i. "i bet you what you dare i can," says he. "all right," says i, "go ahead." "g-e-o-r-g-e j-a-x-o-n--there now," he says. "well," says i, "you done it, but i didn't think you could.  it ain't no slouch of a name to spell--right off without studying." i set it down, private, because somebody might want _me_ to spell it next, and so i wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like i was used to it. it was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too.  i hadn't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much style.  it didn't have an iron latch on the front door, nor a wooden one with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same as houses in town. there warn't no bed in the parlor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps of parlors in towns has beds in them.  there was a big fireplace that was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick; sometimes they wash them over with red water-paint that they call spanish-brown, same as they do in town.  they had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log. there was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece, with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass front, and a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and you could see the pendulum swinging behind it.  it was beautiful to hear that clock tick; and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she got tuckered out.  they wouldn't took any money for her. well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock, made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy.  by one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog by the other; and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn't open their mouths nor look different nor interested.  they squeaked through underneath.  there was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things.  on the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it, which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is, but they warn't real because you could see where pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk, or whatever it was, underneath. this table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red and blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border