bug henry was; and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done.  i don't say that ourn is lambs, because they ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they ain't nothing to _that_ old ram, anyway.  all i say is, kings is kings, and you got to make allowances.  take them all around, they're a mighty ornery lot. it's the way they're raised." "but dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, huck." "well, they all do, jim.  we can't help the way a king smells; history don't tell no way." "now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man in some ways." "yes, a duke's different.  but not very different.  this one's a middling hard lot for a duke.  when he's drunk there ain't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king." "well, anyways, i doan' hanker for no mo' un um, huck.  dese is all i kin stan'." "it's the way i feel, too, jim.  but we've got them on our hands, and we got to remember what they are, and make allowances.  sometimes i wish we could hear of a country that's out of kings." what was the use to tell jim these warn't real kings and dukes?  it wouldn't a done no good; and, besides, it was just as i said:  you couldn't tell them from the real kind. i went to sleep, and jim didn't call me when it was my turn.  he often done that.  when i waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself.  i didn't take notice nor let on.  i knowed what it was about.  he was thinking about his wife and his children, away up yonder, and he was low and homesick; because he hadn't ever been away from home before in his life; and i do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their'n.  it don't seem natural, but i reckon it's so.  he was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged i was asleep, and saying, "po' little 'lizabeth! po' little johnny! it's mighty hard; i spec' i ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'!"  he was a mighty good nigger, jim was. but this time i somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones; and by and by he says: "what makes me feel so bad dis time 'uz bekase i hear sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time i treat my little 'lizabeth so ornery.  she warn't on'y 'bout fo' year ole, en she tuck de sk'yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but she got well, en one day she was a-stannin' aroun', en i says to her, i says: "'shet de do'.' "she never done it; jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me.  it make me mad; en i says agin, mighty loud, i says: "'doan' you hear me?  shet de do'!' "she jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up.  i was a-bilin'!  i says: "'i lay i _make_ you mine!' "en wid dat i fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'. den i went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when i come back dah was dat do' a-stannin' open _yit_, en dat chile stannin' mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears runnin' down.  my, but i _wuz_ mad!  i was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' den--it was a do' dat open innerds--jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, behine de chile, ker-blam!--en my lan', de chile never move'!  my breff mos' hop outer me; en i feel so--so--i doan' know how i feel.  i crope out, all a-tremblin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my head in behine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sudden i says pow! jis' as loud as i could yell.  _she never budge!_  oh, huck, i bust out a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, 'oh, de po' little thing!  de lord god amighty fogive po' ole jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long's he live!'  oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, huck, plumb deef en dumb--en i'd ben a-treat'n her so!" chapter xxiv. next day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns.  jim he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few hours, because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope.  you see, when we left him all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all by himself and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a runaway nigger, you know. so the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it. he was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it.  he dressed jim up in king lear's outfit--it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint and painted jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead, dull, solid blue, like a man that's been drownded nine days.  blamed if he warn't the horriblest looking outrage i ever see.  then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so: sick arab--but harmless when not out of his head. and he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam.  jim was satisfied.  he said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all over every time there was a sound.  the duke told him to make himself free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop out of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone.  which was sound enough judgment; but you take the average man, and he wouldn't wait for him to howl.  why, he didn't only look like he was dead, he looked considerable more than that. these rapscallions wanted to try the nonesuch again, because there was so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, because maybe the news might a worked along down by this time.  they couldn't hit no project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up something on the arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t'other village without any plan, but just trust in providence to lead him the profitable way--meaning the devil, i reckon.  we had all bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n on, and he told me to put mine on.  i done it, of course.  the king's duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy.  i never knowed how clothes could change a body before.  why, before, he looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand and good and pious that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark, and maybe was old leviticus himself.  jim cleaned up the canoe, and i got my paddle ready.  there was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point, about three mile above the town--been there a couple of hours, taking on freight.  says the king: "seein' how i'm dressed, i reckon maybe i better arrive down from st. louis or cincinnati, or some other big place.  go for the steamboat, huckleberry; we'll come down to the village on her." i didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride.  i fetched the shore a half a mile above the village, and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water.  pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face, for it was powerful warm weather; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him. "run her nose in shore," says the king.  i done it.  "wher' you bound for, young man?" "for the steamboat; going to orleans." "git aboard," says the king.  "hold on a minute, my servant 'll he'p you with them bags.  jump out and he'p the gentleman, adolphus"--meaning me, i see. i done so, and then we all three started on again.  the young chap was mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather. he asked the king where he was going, and the king told him he'd come down the river and landed at the other village this morning, and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there.  the young fellow says: "when i first see you i says to myself, 'it's mr. wilks, sure, and he come mighty near getting here in time.'  but then i says again, 'no, i reckon it ain't him, or else he wouldn't be paddling up the river.'  you _ain't_ him, are you?" "no, my name's blodgett--elexander blodgett--_reverend_ elexander blodgett, i s'pose i must say, as i'm one o' the lord's poor servants.  but still i'm jist as able to be sorry for mr. wilks for not arriving in time, all the same, if he's missed anything by it--which i hope he hasn't." "well, he don't miss any property by it, because he'll get that all right; but he's missed seeing his brother peter die--which he mayn't mind, nobody can tell as to that--but his brother would a give anything in this world to see _him_ before he died; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks; hadn't seen him since they was boys together--and hadn't ever seen his brother william at all--that's the deef and dumb one--william ain't more than thirty or thirty-five.  peter and george were the only ones that come out here; george was the married brother; him and his wife both died last year.  harvey and william's the only ones that's left now; and, as i was saying, they haven't got here in time." "did anybody send 'em word?" "oh, yes; a month or two ago, when peter was first took; because peter said then that he sorter felt like he warn't going to get well this time. you see, he was pretty old, and george's g'yirls was too young to be much company for him, except mary jane, the red-headed one; and so he was kinder lonesome after george and his wife died, and didn't seem to care much to live.  he most desperately wanted to see harvey--and william, too, for that matter--because he was one of them kind that can't bear to make a will.  he left a letter behind for harvey, and said he'd told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the property divided up so george's g'yirls would be all right--for george didn't leave nothing.  and that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to." "why do you reckon harvey don't come?  wher' does he live?" "oh, he lives in england--sheffield--preaches there--hasn't ever been in this country.  he hasn't had any too much time--and besides he mightn't a got the letter at all, you know." "too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers, poor soul. you going to orleans, you say?" "yes, but that ain't only a part of it.  i'm going in a ship, next wednesday, for ryo janeero, where my uncle lives." "it's a pretty long journey.  but it'll be lovely; wisht i was a-going. is mary jane the oldest?  how old is the others?" "mary jane's nineteen, susan's fifteen, and joanna's about fourteen--that's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip." "poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so." "well, they could be worse off.  old peter had friends, and they ain't going to let them come to no harm.  there's hobson, the babtis' preacher; and deacon lot hovey, and ben rucker, and abner shackleford, and levi bell, the lawyer; and dr. robinson, and their wives, and the widow bartley, and--well, there's a lot of them; but these are the ones that peter was thickest with, and used to write about sometimes, when he wrote home; so harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets here." well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that young fellow.  blamed if he didn't inquire about everybody and everything in that blessed town, and all about the wilkses; and about peter's business--which was a tanner; and about george's--which was a carpenter; and about harvey's--which was a dissentering minister; and so on, and so on.  then he says: "what did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for?" "because she's a big orleans boat, and i was afeard she mightn't stop there.  when they're deep they won't stop for a hail.  a cincinnati boat will, but this is a st. louis one." "was peter wilks well off?" "oh, yes, pretty well off.  he had houses and land, and it's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up som'ers." "when did you say he died?" "i didn't say, but it was last night." "funeral to-morrow, likely?" "yes, 'bout the middle of the day." "well, it's all terrible sad; but we've all got to go, one time or another. so what we want to do is to be prepared; then we're all right." "yes, sir, it's the best way.  ma used to always say that." when we struck the boat she was about done loading, and pretty soon she got off.  the king never said nothing about going aboard, so i lost my ride, after all.  when the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says: "now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new carpet-bags.  and if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and git him.  and tell him to git himself up regardless.  shove along, now." i see what _he_ was up to; but i never said nothing, of course.  when i got back with the duke we hid the canoe, and then they set down on a log, and the king told him everything, just like the young fellow had said it--every last word of it.  and all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an englishman; and he done it pretty well, too, for a slouch. i can't imitate him, and so i ain't a-going to try to; but he really done it pretty good.  then he says: "how are you on the deef and dumb, bilgewater?" the duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards.  so then they waited for a steamboat. about the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along, but they didn't come from high enough up the river; but at last there was a big one, and they hailed her.  she sent out her yawl, and we went aboard, and she was from cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they was booming mad, and gave us a cussing, and said they wouldn't land us.  but the king was ca'm.  he says: "if gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em, can't it?" so they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the village they yawled us ashore.  about two dozen men flocked down when they see the yawl a-coming, and when the king says: "kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher' mr. peter wilks lives?" they give a glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to say, "what d' i tell you?"  then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle: "i'm sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he _did_ live yesterday evening." sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his back, and says: "alas, alas, our poor brother--gone, and we never got to see him; oh, it's too, too hard!" then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying.  if they warn't the beatenest lot, them two frauds, that ever i struck. well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all sorts of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about his brother's last moments, and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke, and both of them took on about that dead tanner like they'd lost the twelve disciples.  well, if ever i struck anything like it, i'm a nigger. it was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race. chapter xxv. the news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people tearing down on the run from every which way, some of them putting on their coats as they come.  pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd, and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march.  the windows and dooryards was full; and every minute somebody would say, over a fence: "is it _them_?" and somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say: "you bet it is." when we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the three girls was standing in the door.  mary jane _was_ red-headed, but that don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles was come. the king he spread his arms, and mary jane she jumped for them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it!  everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have such good times. then the king he hunched the duke private--i see him do it--and then he looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so then him and the duke, with a hand across each other's shoulder, and t'other hand to their eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody dropping back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stopping, people saying "sh!" and all the men taking their hats off and drooping their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.  and when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight, and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to orleans, most; and then they put their arms around each other's necks, and hung their chins over each other's shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four, i never see two men leak the way they done.  and, mind you, everybody was doing the same; and the place was that damp i never see anything like it. then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t'other on t'other side, and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all to themselves.  well, when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it, and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud--the poor girls, too; and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying a word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead, and then put their hand on their head, and looked up towards the sky, with the tears running down, and then busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing, and give the next woman a show.  i never see anything so disgusting. well, by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long journey of four thousand mile, but it's a trial that's sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears, and so he thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother's heart, because out of their mouths they can't, words being too weak and cold, and all that kind of rot and slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers out a pious goody-goody amen, and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust. and the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their might, and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out. music is a good thing; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash i never see it freshen up things so, and sound so honest and bully. then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up with the ashes of the diseased; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who he would name, for they was names that was very dear to him, and mentioned often in his letters; and so he will name the same, to wit, as follows, vizz.:--rev. mr. hobson, and deacon lot hovey, and mr. ben rucker, and abner shackleford, and levi bell, and dr. robinson, and their wives, and the widow bartley. rev. hobson and dr. robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together--that is, i mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t'other world, and the preacher was pinting him right.  lawyer bell was away up to louisville on business.  but the rest was on hand, and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him; and then they shook hands with the duke and didn't say nothing, but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said "goo-goo--goo-goo-goo" all the time, like a baby that can't talk. so the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town, or to george's family, or to peter.  and he always let on that peter wrote him the things; but that was a lie:  he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat. then mary jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the king he read it out loud and cried over it.  it give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard (which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and land (worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold to harvey and william, and told where the six thousand cash was hid down cellar.  so these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle.  we shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them yaller-boys.  my, the way the king's eyes did shine!  he slaps the duke on the shoulder and says: "oh, _this_ ain't bully nor noth'n!  oh, no, i reckon not!  why, _bully_, it beats the nonesuch, _don't_ it?" the duke allowed it did.  they pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the king says: "it ain't no use talkin'; bein' brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of furrin heirs that's got left is the line for you and me, bilge.  thish yer comes of trust'n to providence.  it's the best way, in the long run.  i've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no better way." most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on trust; but no, they must count it.  so they counts it, and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short.  says the king: "dern him, i wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen dollars?" they worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it.  then the duke says: "well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake--i reckon that's the way of it.  the best way's to let it go, and keep still about it.  we can spare it." "oh, shucks, yes, we can _spare_ it.  i don't k'yer noth'n 'bout that--it's the _count_ i'm thinkin' about.  we want to be awful square and open and above-board here, you know.  we want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before everybody--then ther' ain't noth'n suspicious.  but when the dead man says ther's six thous'n dollars, you know, we don't want to--" "hold on," says the duke.  "le's make up the deffisit," and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket. "it's a most amaz'n' good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rattlin' clever head on you," says the king.  "blest if the old nonesuch ain't a heppin' us out agin," and _he_ begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up. it most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear. "say," says the duke, "i got another idea.  le's go up stairs and count this money, and then take and _give it to the girls_." "good land, duke, lemme hug you!  it's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a man struck.  you have cert'nly got the most astonishin' head i ever see. oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mistake 'bout it.  let 'em fetch along their suspicions now if they want to--this 'll lay 'em out." when we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king he counted it and stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile--twenty elegant little piles.  everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their chops.  then they raked it into the bag again, and i see the king begin to swell himself up for another speech.  he says: "friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them that's left behind in the vale of sorrers.  he has done generous by these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left fatherless and motherless.  yes, and we that knowed him knows that he would a done _more_ generous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin' his dear william and me.  now, _wouldn't_ he?  ther' ain't no question 'bout it in _my_ mind.  well, then, what kind o' brothers would it be that 'd stand in his way at sech a time?  and what kind o' uncles would it be that 'd rob--yes, _rob_--sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved so at sech a time?  if i know william--and i _think_ i do--he--well, i'll jest ask him." he turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy, and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up.  then the king says, "i knowed it; i reckon _that 'll_ convince anybody the way _he_ feels about it.  here, mary jane, susan, joanner, take the money--take it _all_.  it's the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful." mary jane she went for him, susan and the hare-lip went for the duke, and then such another hugging and kissing i never see yet.  and everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the hands off of them frauds, saying all the time: "you _dear_ good souls!--how _lovely_!--how _could_ you!" well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside, and stood a-listening and looking, and not saying anything; and nobody saying anything to him either, because the king was talking and they was all busy listening.  the king was saying--in the middle of something he'd started in on-- "--they bein' partickler friends o' the diseased.  that's why they're invited here this evenin'; but tomorrow we want _all_ to come--everybody; for he respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so it's fitten that his funeral orgies sh'd be public." and so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the duke he couldn't stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper, "_obsequies_, you old fool," and folds it up, and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people's heads to him.  the king he reads it and puts it in his pocket, and says: "poor william, afflicted as he is, his _heart's_ aluz right.  asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral--wants me to make 'em all welcome.  but he needn't a worried--it was jest what i was at." then he weaves along again, perfectly ca'm, and goes to dropping in his funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before.  and when he done it the third time he says: "i say orgies, not because it's the common term, because it ain't--obsequies bein' the common term--but because orgies is the right term. obsequies ain't used in england no more now--it's gone out.  we say orgies now in england.  orgies is better, because it means the thing you're after more exact.  it's a word that's made up out'n the greek _orgo_, outside, open, abroad; and the hebrew _jeesum_, to plant, cover up; hence in_ter._  so, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral." he was the _worst_ i ever struck.  well, the iron-jawed man he laughed right in his face.  everybody was shocked.  everybody says, "why, _doctor_!" and abner shackleford says: "why, robinson, hain't you heard the news?  this is harvey wilks." the king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says: "is it my poor brother's dear good friend and physician?  i--" "keep your hands off of me!" says the doctor.  "_you_ talk like an englishman, _don't_ you?  it's the worst imitation i ever heard.  _you_ peter wilks's brother!  you're a fraud, that's what you are!" well, how they all took on!  they crowded around the doctor and tried to quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how harvey 'd showed in forty ways that he _was_ harvey, and knowed everybody by name, and the names of the very dogs, and begged and _begged_ him not to hurt harvey's feelings and the poor girl's feelings, and all that.  but it warn't no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that pretended to be an englishman and couldn't imitate the lingo no better than what he did was a fraud and a liar.  the poor girls was hanging to the king and crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on _them_.  he says: "i was your father's friend, and i'm your friend; and i warn you as a friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing to do with him, the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic greek and hebrew, as he calls it.  he is the thinnest kind of an impostor--has come here with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these foolish friends here, who ought to know better.  mary jane wilks, you know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too.  now listen to me; turn this pitiful rascal out--i _beg_ you to do it.  will you?" mary jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome!  she says: "_here_ is my answer."  she hove up the bag of money and put it in the king's hands, and says, "take this six thousand dollars, and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to, and don't give us no receipt for it." then she put her arm around the king on one side, and susan and the hare-lip done the same on the other.  everybody clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud.  the doctor says: "all right; i wash _my_ hands of the matter.  but i warn you all that a time 's coming when you're going to feel sick whenever you think of this day." and away he went. "all right, doctor," says the king, kinder mocking him; "we'll try and get 'em to send for you;" which made them all laugh, and they said it was a prime good hit. chapter xxvi. well, when they was all gone the king he asks mary jane how they was off for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for uncle william, and she'd give her own room to uncle harvey, which was a little bigger, and she would turn into the room with her sisters and sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it. the king said the cubby would do for his valley--meaning me. so mary jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was plain but nice.  she said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps took out of her room if they was in uncle harvey's way, but he said they warn't.  the frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor.  there was an old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room with.  the king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for these fixings, and so don't disturb them.  the duke's room was pretty small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby. that night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there, and i stood behind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them, and the niggers waited on the rest.  mary jane she set at the head of the table, with susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried chickens was--and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to force out compliments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop, and said so--said "how _do_ you get biscuits to brown so nice?" and "where, for the land's sake, _did_ you get these amaz'n pickles?" and all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at a supper, you know. and when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things.  the hare-lip she got to pumping me about england, and blest if i didn't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes.  she says: "did you ever see the king?" "who?  william fourth?  well, i bet i have--he goes to our church."  i knowed he was dead years ago, but i never let on.  so when i says he goes to our church, she says: "what--regular?" "yes--regular.  his pew's right over opposite ourn--on t'other side the pulpit." "i thought he lived in london?" "well, he does.  where _would_ he live?" "but i thought _you_ lived in sheffield?" i see i was up a stump.  i had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again.  then i says: "i mean he goes to our church regular when he's in sheffield.  that's only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths." "why, how you talk--sheffield ain't on the sea." "well, who said it was?" "why, you did." "i _didn't_ nuther." "you did!" "i didn't." "you did." "i never said nothing of the kind." "well, what _did_ you say, then?" "said he come to take the sea _baths_--that's what i said." "well, then, how's he going to take the sea baths if it ain't on the sea?" "looky here," i says; "did you ever see any congress-water?" "yes." "well, did you have to go to congress to get it?" "why, no." "well, neither does william fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea bath." "how does he get it, then?" "gets it the way people down here gets congress-water--in barrels.  there in the palace at sheffield they've got furnaces, and he wants his water hot.  they can't bile that amount of water away off there at the sea. they haven't got no conveniences for it." "oh, i see, now.  you might a said that in the first place and saved time." when she said that i see i was out of the woods again, and so i was comfortable and glad.  next, she says: "do you go to church, too?" "yes--regular." "where do you set?" "why, in our pew." "_whose_ pew?" "why, _ourn_--your uncle harvey's." "his'n?  what does _he_ want with a pew?" "wants it to set in.  what did you _reckon_ he wanted with it?" "why, i thought he'd be in the pulpit." rot him, i forgot he was a preacher.  i see i was up a stump again, so i played another chicken bone and got another think.  then i says: "blame it, do you suppose there ain't but one preacher to a church?" "why, what do they want with more?" "what!--to preach before a king?  i never did see such a girl as you. they don't have no less than seventeen." "seventeen!  my land!  why, i wouldn't set out such a string as that, not if i _never_ got to glory.  it must take 'em a week." "shucks, they don't _all_ of 'em preach the same day--only _one_ of 'em." "well, then, what does the rest of 'em do?" "oh, nothing much.  loll around, pass the plate--and one thing or another.  but mainly they don't do nothing." "well, then, what are they _for_?" "why, they're for _style_.  don't you know nothing?" "well, i don't _want_ to know no such foolishness as that.  how is servants treated in england?  do they treat 'em better 'n we treat our niggers?" "_no_!  a servant ain't nobody there.  they treat them worse than dogs." "don't they give 'em holidays, the way we do, christmas and new year's week, and fourth of july?" "oh, just listen!  a body could tell _you_ hain't ever been to england by that.  why, hare-l--why, joanna, they never see a holiday from year's end to year's end; never go to the circus, nor theater, nor nigger shows, nor nowheres." "nor church?" "nor church." "but _you_ always went to church." well, i was gone up again.  i forgot i was the old man's servant.  but next minute i whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was different from a common servant and _had_ to go to church whether he wanted to or not, and set with the family, on account of its being the law.  but i didn't do it pretty good, and when i got done i see she warn't satisfied.  she says: "honest injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies?" "honest injun," says i. "none of it at all?" "none of it at all.  not a lie in it," says i. "lay your hand on this book and say it." i see it warn't nothing but a dictionary, so i laid my hand on it and said it.  so then she looked a little better satisfied, and says: "well, then, i'll believe some of it; but i hope to gracious if i'll believe the rest." "what is it you won't believe, joe?" says mary jane, stepping in with susan behind her.  "it ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him, and him a stranger and so far from his people.  how would you like to be treated so?" "that's always your way, maim--always sailing in to help somebody before they're hurt.  i hain't done nothing to him.  he's told some stretchers, i reckon, and i said i wouldn't swallow it all; and that's every bit and grain i _did_ say.  i reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can't he?" "i don't care whether 'twas little or whether 'twas big; he's here in our house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of you to say it.  if you was in his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn't to say a thing to another person that will make _them_ feel ashamed." "why, mam, he said--" "it don't make no difference what he _said_--that ain't the thing.  the thing is for you to treat him _kind_, and not be saying things to make him remember he ain't in his own country and amongst his own folks." i says to myself, _this_ is a girl that i'm letting that old reptile rob her of her money! then susan _she_ waltzed in; and if you'll believe me, she did give hare-lip hark from the tomb! says i to myself, and this is _another_ one that i'm letting him rob her of her money! then mary jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely again--which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly anything left o' poor hare-lip.  so she hollered. "all right, then," says the other girls; "you just ask his pardon." she done it, too; and she done it beautiful.  she done it so beautiful it was good to hear; and i wished i could tell her a thousand lies, so she could do it again. i says to myself, this is _another_ one that i'm letting him rob her of her money.  and when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out to make me feel at home and know i was amongst friends.  i felt so ornery and low down and mean that i says to myself, my mind's made up; i'll hive that money for them or bust. so then i lit out--for bed, i said, meaning some time or another.  when i got by myself i went to thinking the thing over.  i says to myself, shall i go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds?  no--that won't do. he might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me.  shall i go, private, and tell mary jane?  no--i dasn't do it. her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it.  if she was to fetch in help i'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with, i judge.  no; there ain't no good way but one.  i got to steal that money, somehow; and i got to steal it some way that they won't suspicion that i done it. they've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-going to leave till they've played this family and this town for all they're worth, so i'll find a chance time enough. i'll steal it and hide it; and by and by, when i'm away down the river, i'll write a letter and tell mary jane where it's hid.  but i better hive it tonight if i can, because the doctor maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he might scare them out of here yet. so, thinks i, i'll go and search them rooms.  upstairs the hall was dark, but i found the duke's room, and started to paw around it with my hands; but i recollected it wouldn't be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so then i went to his room and begun to paw around there.  but i see i couldn't do nothing without a candle, and i dasn't light one, of course.  so i judged i'd got to do the other thing--lay for them and eavesdrop.  about that time i hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the bed; i reached for it, but it wasn't where i thought it would be; but i touched the curtain that hid mary jane's frocks, so i jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst the gowns, and stood there perfectly still. they come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to get down and look under the bed.  then i was glad i hadn't found the bed when i wanted it.  and yet, you know, it's kind of natural to hide under the bed when you are up to anything private.  they sets down then, and the king says: "well, what is it?  and cut it middlin' short, because it's better for us to be down there a-whoopin' up the mournin' than up here givin' 'em a chance to talk us over." "well, this is it, capet.  i ain't easy; i ain't comfortable.  that doctor lays on my mind.  i wanted to know your plans.  i've got a notion, and i think it's a sound one." "what is it, duke?" "that we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip it down the river with what we've got.  specially, seeing we got it so easy--_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of course we allowed to have to steal it back.  i'm for knocking off and lighting out." that made me feel pretty bad.  about an hour or two ago it would a been a little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, the king rips out and says: "what!  and not sell out the rest o' the property?  march off like a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous'n' dollars' worth o' property layin' around jest sufferin' to be scooped in?--and all good, salable stuff, too." the duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn't want to go no deeper--didn't want to rob a lot of orphans of _everything_ they had. "why, how you talk!" says the king.  "we sha'n't rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money.  the people that _buys_ the property is the suff'rers; because as soon 's it's found out 'at we didn't own it--which won't be long after we've slid--the sale won't be valid, and it 'll all go back to the estate.  these yer orphans 'll git their house back agin, and that's enough for _them_; they're young and spry, and k'n easy earn a livin'.  _they_ ain't a-goin to suffer.  why, jest think--there's thous'n's and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off.  bless you, _they_ ain't got noth'n' to complain of." well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all right, but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay, and that doctor hanging over them.  but the king says: "cuss the doctor!  what do we k'yer for _him_?  hain't we got all the fools in town on our side?  and ain't that a big enough majority in any town?" so they got ready to go down stairs again.  the duke says: "i don't think we put that money in a good place." that cheered me up.  i'd begun to think i warn't going to get a hint of no kind to help me.  the king says: "why?" "because mary jane 'll be in mourning from this out; and first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of it?" "your head's level agin, duke," says the king; and he comes a-fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where i was.  i stuck tight to the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and i wondered what them fellows would say to me if they catched me; and i tried to think what i'd better do if they did catch me.  but the king he got the bag before i could think more than about a half a thought, and he never suspicioned i was around.  they took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed, and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now, because a nigger only makes up the feather-bed, and don't turn over the straw tick only about twice a year, and so it warn't in no danger of getting stole now. but i knowed better.  i had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs.  i groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till i could get a chance to do better.  i judged i better hide it outside of the house somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking:  i knowed that very well.  then i turned in, with my clothes all on; but i couldn't a gone to sleep if i'd a wanted to, i was in such a sweat to get through with the business.  by and by i heard the king and the duke come up; so i rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder, and waited to see if anything was going to happen.  but nothing did. so i held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones hadn't begun yet; and then i slipped down the ladder. chapter xxvii. i crept to their doors and listened; they was snoring.  so i tiptoed along, and got down stairs all right.  there warn't a sound anywheres.  i peeped through a crack of the dining-room door, and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs.  the door was open into the parlor, where the corpse was laying, and there was a candle in both rooms. i passed along, and the parlor door was open; but i see there warn't nobody in there but the remainders of peter; so i shoved on by; but the front door was locked, and the key wasn't there.  just then i heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me.  i run in the parlor and took a swift look around, and the only place i see to hide the bag was in the coffin.  the lid was shoved along about a foot, showing the dead man's face down in there, with a wet cloth over it, and his shroud on.  i tucked the money-bag in under the lid, just down beyond where his hands was crossed, which made me creep, they was so cold, and then i run back across the room and in behind the door. the person coming was mary jane.  she went to the coffin, very soft, and kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and i see she begun to cry, though i couldn't hear her, and her back was to me.  i slid out, and as i passed the dining-room i thought i'd make sure them watchers hadn't seen me; so i looked through the crack, and everything was all right.  they hadn't stirred. i slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing playing out that way after i had took so much trouble and run so much resk about it.  says i, if it could stay where it is, all right; because when we get down the river a hundred mile or two i could write back to mary jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the thing that's going to happen; the thing that's going to happen is, the money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid.  then the king 'll get it again, and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another chance to smouch it from him. of course i _wanted_ to slide down and get it out of there, but i dasn't try it.  every minute it was getting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir, and i might get catched--catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody hadn't hired me to take care of.  i don't wish to be mixed up in no such business as that, i says to myself. when i got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up, and the watchers was gone.  there warn't nobody around but the family and the widow bartley and our tribe.  i watched their faces to see if anything had been happening, but i couldn't tell. towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man, and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then set all our chairs in rows, and borrowed more from the neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full.  i see the coffin lid was the way it was before, but i dasn't go to look in under it, with folks around. then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an hour the people filed around slow, in single rank, and looked down at the dead man's face a minute, and some dropped in a tear, and it was all very still and solemn, only the girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a little.  there warn't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and blowing noses--because people always blows them more at a funeral than they do at other places except church. when the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the last touches, and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable, and making no more sound than a cat.  he never spoke; he moved people around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways, and done it with nods, and signs with his hands.  then he took his place over against the wall. he was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest man i ever see; and there warn't no more smile to him than there is to a ham. they had borrowed a melodeum--a sick one; and when everything was ready a young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and colicky, and everybody joined in and sung, and peter was the only one that had a good thing, according to my notion.  then the reverend hobson opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was only one dog, but he made a most powerful racket, and he kept it up right along; the parson he had to stand there, over the coffin, and wait--you couldn't hear yourself think.  it was right down awkward, and nobody didn't seem to know what to do.  but pretty soon they see that long-legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say, "don't you worry--just depend on me."  then he stooped down and begun to glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people's heads.  so he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more and more outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two sides of the room, he disappears down cellar.  then in about two seconds we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or two, and then everything was dead still, and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off.  in a minute or two here comes this undertaker's back and shoulders gliding along the wall again; and so he glided and glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards the preacher, over the people's heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse whisper, "_he had a rat_!"  then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place.  you could see it was a great satisfaction to the people, because naturally they wanted to know.  a little thing like that don't cost nothing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up to and liked.  there warn't no more popular man in town than what that undertaker was. well, the