says: "yes, mars sid, a dog.  cur'us dog, too.  does you want to go en look at 'im?" "yes." i hunched tom, and whispers: "you going, right here in the daybreak?  _that_ warn't the plan." "no, it warn't; but it's the plan _now_." so, drat him, we went along, but i didn't like it much.  when we got in we couldn't hardly see anything, it was so dark; but jim was there, sure enough, and could see us; and he sings out: "why, _huck_!  en good _lan_'! ain' dat misto tom?" i just knowed how it would be; i just expected it.  i didn't know nothing to do; and if i had i couldn't a done it, because that nigger busted in and says: "why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen?" we could see pretty well now.  tom he looked at the nigger, steady and kind of wondering, and says: "does _who_ know us?" "why, dis-yer runaway nigger." "i don't reckon he does; but what put that into your head?" "what _put_ it dar?  didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed you?" tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way: "well, that's mighty curious.  _who_ sung out? _when_ did he sing out?  _what_ did he sing out?" and turns to me, perfectly ca'm, and says, "did _you_ hear anybody sing out?" of course there warn't nothing to be said but the one thing; so i says: "no; i ain't heard nobody say nothing." then he turns to jim, and looks him over like he never see him before, and says: "did you sing out?" "no, sah," says jim; "i hain't said nothing, sah." "not a word?" "no, sah, i hain't said a word." "did you ever see us before?" "no, sah; not as i knows on." so tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and says, kind of severe: "what do you reckon's the matter with you, anyway?  what made you think somebody sung out?" "oh, it's de dad-blame' witches, sah, en i wisht i was dead, i do.  dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so.  please to don't tell nobody 'bout it sah, er ole mars silas he'll scole me; 'kase he say dey _ain't_ no witches.  i jis' wish to goodness he was heah now--_den_ what would he say!  i jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to git aroun' it _dis_ time.  but it's awluz jis' so; people dat's _sot_, stays sot; dey won't look into noth'n'en fine it out f'r deyselves, en when _you_ fine it out en tell um 'bout it, dey doan' b'lieve you." tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at jim, and says: "i wonder if uncle silas is going to hang this nigger.  if i was to catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, i wouldn't give him up, i'd hang him."  and whilst the nigger stepped to the door to look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to jim and says: "don't ever let on to know us.  and if you hear any digging going on nights, it's us; we're going to set you free." jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nigger come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nigger wanted us to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because the witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks around then. chapter xxxv. it would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down into the woods; because tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how to dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble; what we must have was a lot of them rotten chunks that's called fox-fire, and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a dark place.  we fetched an armful and hid it in the weeds, and set down to rest, and tom says, kind of dissatisfied: "blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be. and so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.  there ain't no watchman to be drugged--now there _ought_ to be a watchman.  there ain't even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to.  and there's jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his bed:  why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain.  and uncle silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the punkin-headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger.  jim could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg.  why, drat it, huck, it's the stupidest arrangement i ever see. you got to invent _all_ the difficulties.  well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can with the materials we've got. anyhow, there's one thing--there's more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers, where there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who it was their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all out of your own head.  now look at just that one thing of the lantern.  when you come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern's resky.  why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to, i believe.  now, whilst i think of it, we got to hunt up something to make a saw out of the first chance we get." "what do we want of a saw?" "what do we _want_ of it?  hain't we got to saw the leg of jim's bed off, so as to get the chain loose?" "why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the chain off." "well, if that ain't just like you, huck finn.  you _can_ get up the infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing.  why, hain't you ever read any books at all?--baron trenck, nor casanova, nor benvenuto chelleeny, nor henri iv., nor none of them heroes?  who ever heard of getting a prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that?  no; the way all the best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can't see no sign of it's being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly sound. then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip off your chain, and there you are.  nothing to do but hitch your rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat--because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know--and there's your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native langudoc, or navarre, or wherever it is. it's gaudy, huck.  i wish there was a moat to this cabin. if we get time, the night of the escape, we'll dig one." i says: "what do we want of a moat when we're going to snake him out from under the cabin?" but he never heard me.  he had forgot me and everything else.  he had his chin in his hand, thinking.  pretty soon he sighs and shakes his head; then sighs again, and says: "no, it wouldn't do--there ain't necessity enough for it." "for what?"  i says. "why, to saw jim's leg off," he says. "good land!"  i says; "why, there ain't _no_ necessity for it.  and what would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?" "well, some of the best authorities has done it.  they couldn't get the chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.  and a leg would be better still.  but we got to let that go.  there ain't necessity enough in this case; and, besides, jim's a nigger, and wouldn't understand the reasons for it, and how it's the custom in europe; so we'll let it go.  but there's one thing--he can have a rope ladder; we can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough.  and we can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way.  and i've et worse pies." "why, tom sawyer, how you talk," i says; "jim ain't got no use for a rope ladder." "he _has_ got use for it.  how _you_ talk, you better say; you don't know nothing about it.  he's _got_ to have a rope ladder; they all do." "what in the nation can he _do_ with it?" "_do_ with it?  he can hide it in his bed, can't he?"  that's what they all do; and _he's_ got to, too.  huck, you don't ever seem to want to do anything that's regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the time. s'pose he _don't_ do nothing with it? ain't it there in his bed, for a clew, after he's gone? and don't you reckon they'll want clews?  of course they will.  and you wouldn't leave them any?  that would be a _pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn't_ it!  i never heard of such a thing." "well," i says, "if it's in the regulations, and he's got to have it, all right, let him have it; because i don't wish to go back on no regulations; but there's one thing, tom sawyer--if we go to tearing up our sheets to make jim a rope ladder, we're going to get into trouble with aunt sally, just as sure as you're born.  now, the way i look at it, a hickry-bark ladder don't cost nothing, and don't waste nothing, and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick, as any rag ladder you can start; and as for jim, he ain't had no experience, and so he don't care what kind of a--" "oh, shucks, huck finn, if i was as ignorant as you i'd keep still--that's what i'd do.  who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping by a hickry-bark ladder?  why, it's perfectly ridiculous." "well, all right, tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my advice, you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline." he said that would do.  and that gave him another idea, and he says: "borrow a shirt, too." "what do we want of a shirt, tom?" "want it for jim to keep a journal on." "journal your granny--_jim_ can't write." "s'pose he _can't_ write--he can make marks on the shirt, can't he, if we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron barrel-hoop?" "why, tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better one; and quicker, too." "_prisoners_ don't have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull pens out of, you muggins.  they _always_ make their pens out of the hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or something like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks and weeks and months and months to file it out, too, because they've got to do it by rubbing it on the wall.  _they_ wouldn't use a goose-quill if they had it. it ain't regular." "well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of?" "many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the common sort and women; the best authorities uses their own blood.  jim can do that; and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know where he's captivated, he can write it on the bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window.  the iron mask always done that, and it's a blame' good way, too." "jim ain't got no tin plates.  they feed him in a pan." "that ain't nothing; we can get him some." "can't nobody _read_ his plates." "that ain't got anything to _do_ with it, huck finn.  all _he's_ got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out.  you don't _have_ to be able to read it. why, half the time you can't read anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else." "well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates?" "why, blame it all, it ain't the _prisoner's_ plates." "but it's _somebody's_ plates, ain't it?" "well, spos'n it is?  what does the _prisoner_ care whose--" he broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing.  so we cleared out for the house. along during the morning i borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the clothes-line; and i found an old sack and put them in it, and we went down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too.  i called it borrowing, because that was what pap always called it; but tom said it warn't borrowing, it was stealing.  he said we was representing prisoners; and prisoners don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody don't blame them for it, either.  it ain't no crime in a prisoner to steal the thing he needs to get away with, tom said; it's his right; and so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves out of prison with.  he said if we warn't prisoners it would be a very different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when he warn't a prisoner.  so we allowed we would steal everything there was that come handy.  and yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that, when i stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it was for. tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we _needed_. well, i says, i needed the watermelon.  but he said i didn't need it to get out of prison with; there's where the difference was.  he said if i'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to jim to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.  so i let it go at that, though i couldn't see no advantage in my representing a prisoner if i got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that every time i see a chance to hog a watermelon. well, as i was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then tom he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst i stood off a piece to keep watch.  by and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile to talk.  he says: "everything's all right now except tools; and that's easy fixed." "tools?"  i says. "yes." "tools for what?" "why, to dig with.  we ain't a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we?" "ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a nigger out with?"  i says. he turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says: "huck finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels, and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?  now i want to ask you--if you got any reasonableness in you at all--what kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?  why, they might as well lend him the key and done with it.  picks and shovels--why, they wouldn't furnish 'em to a king." "well, then," i says, "if we don't want the picks and shovels, what do we want?" "a couple of case-knives." "to dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?" "yes." "confound it, it's foolish, tom." "it don't make no difference how foolish it is, it's the _right_ way--and it's the regular way.  and there ain't no _other_ way, that ever i heard of, and i've read all the books that gives any information about these things. they always dig out with a case-knife--and not through dirt, mind you; generly it's through solid rock.  and it takes them weeks and weeks and weeks, and for ever and ever.  why, look at one of them prisoners in the bottom dungeon of the castle deef, in the harbor of marseilles, that dug himself out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon?" "i don't know." "well, guess." "i don't know.  a month and a half." "_thirty-seven year_--and he come out in china.  _that's_ the kind.  i wish the bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock." "_jim_ don't know nobody in china." "what's _that_ got to do with it?  neither did that other fellow.  but you're always a-wandering off on a side issue.  why can't you stick to the main point?" "all right--i don't care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and jim don't, either, i reckon.  but there's one thing, anyway--jim's too old to be dug out with a case-knife.  he won't last." "yes he will _last_, too.  you don't reckon it's going to take thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you?" "how long will it take, tom?" "well, we can't resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn't take very long for uncle silas to hear from down there by new orleans.  he'll hear jim ain't from there.  then his next move will be to advertise jim, or something like that.  so we can't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to.  by rights i reckon we ought to be a couple of years; but we can't.  things being so uncertain, what i recommend is this:  that we really dig right in, as quick as we can; and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it thirty-seven years.  then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time there's an alarm.  yes, i reckon that 'll be the best way." "now, there's _sense_ in that," i says.  "letting on don't cost nothing; letting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any object, i don't mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year.  it wouldn't strain me none, after i got my hand in.  so i'll mosey along now, and smouch a couple of case-knives." "smouch three," he says; "we want one to make a saw out of." "tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to sejest it," i says, "there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the weather-boarding behind the smoke-house." he looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says: "it ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, huck.  run along and smouch the knives--three of them."  so i done it. chapter xxxvi. as soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our pile of fox-fire, and went to work.  we cleared everything out of the way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log.  tom said he was right behind jim's bed now, and we'd dig in under it, and when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there was any hole there, because jim's counter-pin hung down most to the ground, and you'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.  so we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see we'd done anything hardly.  at last i says: "this ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job, tom sawyer." he never said nothing.  but he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped digging, and then for a good little while i knowed that he was thinking. then he says: "it ain't no use, huck, it ain't a-going to work.  if we was prisoners it would, because then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no hurry; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right, and the way it ought to be done.  but _we_ can't fool along; we got to rush; we ain't got no time to spare.  if we was to put in another night this way we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get well--couldn't touch a case-knife with them sooner." "well, then, what we going to do, tom?" "i'll tell you.  it ain't right, and it ain't moral, and i wouldn't like it to get out; but there ain't only just the one way:  we got to dig him out with the picks, and _let on_ it's case-knives." "_now_ you're _talking_!"  i says; "your head gets leveler and leveler all the time, tom sawyer," i says.  "picks is the thing, moral or no moral; and as for me, i don't care shucks for the morality of it, nohow.  when i start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a sunday-school book, i ain't no ways particular how it's done so it's done.  what i want is my nigger; or what i want is my watermelon; or what i want is my sunday-school book; and if a pick's the handiest thing, that's the thing i'm a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that sunday-school book out with; and i don't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther." "well," he says, "there's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like this; if it warn't so, i wouldn't approve of it, nor i wouldn't stand by and see the rules broke--because right is right, and wrong is wrong, and a body ain't got no business doing wrong when he ain't ignorant and knows better.  it might answer for _you_ to dig jim out with a pick, _without_ any letting on, because you don't know no better; but it wouldn't for me, because i do know better.  gimme a case-knife." he had his own by him, but i handed him mine.  he flung it down, and says: "gimme a _case-knife_." i didn't know just what to do--but then i thought.  i scratched around amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he took it and went to work, and never said a word. he was always just that particular.  full of principle. so then i got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about, and made the fur fly.  we stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it. when i got up stairs i looked out at the window and see tom doing his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his hands was so sore.  at last he says: "it ain't no use, it can't be done.  what you reckon i better do?  can't you think of no way?" "yes," i says, "but i reckon it ain't regular.  come up the stairs, and let on it's a lightning-rod." so he done it. next day tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house, for to make some pens for jim out of, and six tallow candles; and i hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin plates.  tom says it wasn't enough; but i said nobody wouldn't ever see the plates that jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel and jimpson weeds under the window-hole--then we could tote them back and he could use them over again.  so tom was satisfied.  then he says: "now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to jim." "take them in through the hole," i says, "when we get it done." he only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying.  by and by he said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to decide on any of them yet.  said we'd got to post jim first. that night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him.  then we whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half the job was done.  we crept in under jim's bed and into the cabin, and pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over jim awhile, and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle and gradual.  he was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away, and clearing out without losing any time.  but tom he showed him how unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans, and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.  so jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old times awhile, and then tom asked a lot of questions, and when jim told him uncle silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and aunt sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and both of them was kind as they could be, tom says: "_now_ i know how to fix it.  we'll send you some things by them." i said, "don't do nothing of the kind; it's one of the most jackass ideas i ever struck;" but he never paid no attention to me; went right on.  it was his way when he'd got his plans set. so he told jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other large things by nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the lookout, and not be surprised, and not let nat see him open them; and we would put small things in uncle's coat-pockets and he must steal them out; and we would tie things to aunt's apron-strings or put them in her apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and what they was for.  and told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with his blood, and all that. he told him everything.  jim he couldn't see no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just as tom said. jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed.  tom was in high spirits. he said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave jim to our children to get out; for he believed jim would come to like it better and better the more he got used to it.  he said that in that way it could be strung out to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record.  and he said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it. in the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass candlestick into handy sizes, and tom put them and the pewter spoon in his pocket.  then we went to the nigger cabins, and while i got nat's notice off, tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a corn-pone that was in jim's pan, and we went along with nat to see how it would work, and it just worked noble; when jim bit into it it most mashed all his teeth out; and there warn't ever anything could a worked better. tom said so himself. jim he never let on but what it was only just a piece of rock or something like that that's always getting into bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first. and whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a couple of the hounds bulging in from under jim's bed; and they kept on piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn't hardly room in there to get your breath.  by jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to door!  the nigger nat he only just hollered "witches" once, and keeled over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was dying.  tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of jim's meat, and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back again and shut the door, and i knowed he'd fixed the other door too. then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and asking him if he'd been imagining he saw something again.  he raised up, and blinked his eyes around, and says: "mars sid, you'll say i's a fool, but if i didn't b'lieve i see most a million dogs, er devils, er some'n, i wisht i may die right heah in dese tracks.  i did, mos' sholy.  mars sid, i _felt_ um--i _felt_ um, sah; dey was all over me.  dad fetch it, i jis' wisht i could git my han's on one er dem witches jis' wunst--on'y jis' wunst--it's all i'd ast.  but mos'ly i wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, i does." tom says: "well, i tell you what i think.  what makes them come here just at this runaway nigger's breakfast-time?  it's because they're hungry; that's the reason.  you make them a witch pie; that's the thing for _you_ to do." "but my lan', mars sid, how's i gwyne to make 'm a witch pie?  i doan' know how to make it.  i hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'." "well, then, i'll have to make it myself." "will you do it, honey?--will you?  i'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot, i will!" "all right, i'll do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good to us and showed us the runaway nigger.  but you got to be mighty careful.  when we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the pan, don't you let on you see it at all.  and don't you look when jim unloads the pan--something might happen, i don't know what.  and above all, don't you _handle_ the witch-things." "_hannel 'm_, mars sid?  what _is_ you a-talkin' 'bout?  i wouldn' lay de weight er my finger on um, not f'r ten hund'd thous'n billion dollars, i wouldn't." chapter xxxvii. that was all fixed.  so then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails that tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in aunt sally's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck in the band of uncle silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger's house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and tom dropped the pewter spoon in uncle silas's coat-pocket, and aunt sally wasn't come yet, so we had to wait a little while. and when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn't hardly wait for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest child's head with her thimble with the other, and says: "i've hunted high and i've hunted low, and it does beat all what _has_ become of your other shirt." my heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry out of him the size of a warwhoop, and tom he turned kinder blue around the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and i would a sold out for half price if there was a bidder.  but after that we was all right again--it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold. uncle silas he says: "it's most uncommon curious, i can't understand it.  i know perfectly well i took it _off_, because--" "because you hain't got but one _on_.  just _listen_ at the man!  i know you took it off, and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering memory, too, because it was on the clo's-line yesterday--i see it there myself. but it's gone, that's the long and the short of it, and you'll just have to change to a red flann'l one till i can get time to make a new one. and it 'll be the third i've made in two years.  it just keeps a body on the jump to keep you in shirts; and whatever you do manage to _do_ with 'm all is more'n i can make out.  a body 'd think you _would_ learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life." "i know it, sally, and i do try all i can.  but it oughtn't to be altogether my fault, because, you know, i don't see them nor have nothing to do with them except when they're on me; and i don't believe i've ever lost one of them _off_ of me." "well, it ain't _your_ fault if you haven't, silas; you'd a done it if you could, i reckon.  and the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther.  ther's a spoon gone; and _that_ ain't all.  there was ten, and now ther's only nine. the calf got the shirt, i reckon, but the calf never took the spoon, _that's_ certain." "why, what else is gone, sally?" "ther's six _candles_ gone--that's what.  the rats could a got the candles, and i reckon they did; i wonder they don't walk off with the whole place, the way you're always going to stop their holes and don't do it; and if they warn't fools they'd sleep in your hair, silas--_you'd_ never find it out; but you can't lay the _spoon_ on the rats, and that i know." "well, sally, i'm in fault, and i acknowledge it; i've been remiss; but i won't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes." "oh, i wouldn't hurry; next year 'll do.  matilda angelina araminta _phelps!_" whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any.  just then the nigger woman steps on to the passage, and says: "missus, dey's a sheet gone." "a _sheet_ gone!  well, for the land's sake!" "i'll stop up them holes to-day," says uncle silas, looking sorrowful. "oh, _do_ shet up!--s'pose the rats took the _sheet_?  _where's_ it gone, lize?" "clah to goodness i hain't no notion, miss' sally.  she wuz on de clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone:  she ain' dah no mo' now." "i reckon the world _is_ coming to an end.  i _never_ see the beat of it in all my born days.  a shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can--" "missus," comes a young yaller wench, "dey's a brass cannelstick miss'n." "cler out from here, you hussy, er i'll take a skillet to ye!" well, she was just a-biling.  i begun to lay for a chance; i reckoned i would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated.  she kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, and everybody else mighty meek and quiet; and at last uncle silas, looking kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket.  she stopped, with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, i wished i was in jeruslem or somewheres. but not long, because she says: "it's _just_ as i expected.  so you had it in your pocket all the time; and like as not you've got the other things there, too.  how'd it get there?" "i reely don't know, sally," he says, kind of apologizing, "or you know i would tell.  i was a-studying over my text in acts seventeen before breakfast, and i reckon i put it in there, not noticing, meaning to put my testament in, and it must be so, because my testament ain't in; but i'll go and see; and if the testament is where i had it, i'll know i didn't put it in, and that will show that i laid the testament down and took up the spoon, and--" "oh, for the land's sake!  give a body a rest!  go 'long now, the whole kit and biling of ye; and don't come nigh me again till i've got back my peace of mind." i'd a heard her if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speaking it out; and i'd a got up and obeyed her if i'd a been dead.  as we was passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf, and never said nothing, and went out.  tom see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says: "well, it ain't no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain't reliable." then he says:  "but he done us a good turn with the spoon, anyway, without knowing it, and so we'll go and do him one without _him_ knowing it--stop up his rat-holes." there was a noble good lot of them down cellar, and it took us a whole hour, but we done the job tight and good and shipshape.  then we heard steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes the old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t'other, looking as absent-minded as year before last.  he went a mooning around, first to one rat-hole and then another, till he'd been to them all.  then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of his candle and thinking.  then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs, saying: "well, for the life of me i can't remember when i done it.  i could show her now that i warn't to blame on account of the rats.  but never mind--let it go.  i reckon it wouldn't do no good." and so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left.  he was a mighty nice old man.  and always is. tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said we'd got to have it; so he took a think.  when he had ciphered it out he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see aunt sally coming, and then tom went to counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and i slid one of them up my sleeve, and tom says: "why, aunt sally, there ain't but nine spoons _yet_." she says: "go 'long to your play, and don't bother me.  i know better, i counted 'm myself." "well, i've counted them twice, aunty, and i can't make but nine." she looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count--anybody would. "i declare to gracious ther' _ain't_ but nine!" she says.  "why, what in the world--plague _take_ the things, i'll count 'm again." so i slipped back the one i had, and when she got done counting, she says: "hang the troublesome rubbage, ther's _ten_ now!" and she looked huffy and bothered both.  but tom says: "why, aunty, i don't think there's ten." "you numskull, didn't you see me _count 'm?_" "i know, but--" "well, i'll count 'm _again_." so i smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.  well, she _was_ in a tearing way--just a-trembling all over, she was so mad.  but she counted and counted till she got that addled she'd start to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times they come out right, and three times they come out wrong.  then she grabbed up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she'd skin us.  so we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and jim got it all right, along with her shingle nail, before noon.  we was very well satisfied with this business, and tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took, because he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save her life; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right if she _did_; and said that after she'd about counted her head off for the next three days he judged she'd give it up and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more. so we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of her closet; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of days till she didn't know how many sheets she had any more, and she didn't _care_, and warn't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it, and wouldn't count them again not to save her life; she druther die first. so we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn't no consequence, it would blow over by and by. but that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie.  we fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it done at last, and very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day; and we had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, and we got burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with the smoke; because, you see, we didn't want nothing but a crust, and we couldn't prop it up right, and she would always cave in.  but of course we thought of the right way at last--which was to cook the ladder, too, in the pie.  so then we laid in with jim the second night, and tore up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together, and long before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with.  we let on it took nine months to make it. and in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn't go into the pie.  being made of a whole sheet, that way, there was rope enough for forty pies if we'd a wanted them, and plenty left over for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose.  we could a had a whole dinner. but we didn't need it.  all we needed was just enough for the pie, and so we throwed the rest away.  we didn't cook none of the pies in the wash-pan--afraid the solder would melt; but uncle silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from england with william the conqueror in the mayflower or one of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things that was valuable, not on account of being any account, because they warn't, but on account of them being relicts, you know, and we snaked her out, private, and took her down there, but she failed on the first pies, because we didn't know how, but she come up smiling on the last one.  we took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, and loaded her up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down the lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off five foot, with the long handle, cool and comfortable, and in fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to look at. but the person that et it would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope ladder wouldn't cramp him down to business i don't know nothing what i'm talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time, too. nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in jim's pan; and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles; and so jim got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick, and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole. chapter xxxviii. making them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all.  that's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall.  but he had to have it; tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat of arms. "look at lady jane grey," he says; "look at gilford dudley; look at old northumberland!  why, huck, s'pose it _is_ considerble trouble?--what you going to do?--how you going to get around it?  jim's _got_ to do his inscription and coat of arms.  they all do." jim says: "why, mars tom, i hain't got no coat o' arm; i hain't got nuffn but dish yer ole shirt, en you knows i got to keep de journal on dat." "oh, you don't understand, jim; a coat of arms is very different." "well," i says, "jim's right, anyway, when he says he ain't got no coat of arms, because he hain't." "i reckon i knowed that," tom says, "but you bet he'll have one before he goes out of this--because he's going out _right_, and there ain't going to be no flaws in his record." so whilst me and jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, jim a-making his'n out of the brass and i making mine out of the spoon, tom set to work to think out the coat of arms.  by and by he said he'd struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there was one which he reckoned he'd decide on.  he says: "on the scutcheon we'll have a bend _or_ in the dexter base, a saltire _murrey_ in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge, and under his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron _vert_ in a chief engrailed, and three invected lines on a field _azure_, with the nombril points rampant on a dancette indented; crest, a runaway nigger, _sable_, with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister; and a couple of gules for supporters, which is you and me; motto, _maggiore fretta, minore otto._  got it out of a book--means the more haste the less speed." "geewhillikins," i says, "but what does the rest of it mean?" "we ain't got no time to bother over that," he says; "we got to dig in like all git-out." "well, anyway," i says, "what's _some_ of it?  what's a fess?" "a fess--a fess is--_you_ don't need to know what a fess is.  i'll show him how to make it when he gets to it." "shucks, tom," i says, "i think you might tell a person.  what's a bar sinister?" "oh, i don't know.  but he's got to have it.  all the nobility does." that was just his way.  if it didn't suit him to explain a thing to you, he wouldn't do it.  you might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no difference. he'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a mournful inscription--said jim got to have one, like they all done.  he made up a lot, and wrote them out on a paper, and read them off, so: 1.  here a captive heart busted. 2.  here a poor prisoner, forsook by the world and friends, fretted his sorrowful life. 3.  here a lonely heart broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity. 4.  here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven years of bitter captivity, perished a noble stranger, natural son of louis xiv. tom's voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke down. when he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for jim to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on.  jim said it would take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he didn't know how to make letters, besides; but tom said he would block them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing to do but just follow the lines.  then pretty soon he says: "come to think, the logs ain't a-going to do; they don't have log walls in a dungeon:  we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock.  we'll fetch a rock." jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.  but tom said he would let me help him do it.  then he took a look to see how me and jim was getting along with the pens.  it was most pesky tedious hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly; so tom says: "i know how to fix it.  we got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock. there's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill, and we'll smouch it, and carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it, too." it warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grindstone nuther; but we allowed we'd tackle it.  it warn't quite midnight yet, so we cleared out for the mill, leaving jim at work.  we smouched the grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough job. sometimes, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling over, and she come mighty near mashing us every time.  tom said she was going to get one of us, sure, before we got through.  we got her half way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with sweat.  we see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch jim. so he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing; and tom superintended.  he could out-superintend any boy i ever see.  he knowed how to do everything. our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grindstone through; but jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough.  then tom marked out them things on it with the nail, and set jim to work on them, with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grindstone under his straw tick and sleep on it.  then we helped him fix his chain back on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves.  but tom thought of something, and says: "you got any spiders in here, jim?" "no, sah, thanks to goodness i hain't, mars tom." "all right, we'll get you some." "but bless you, honey, i doan' _want_ none.  i's afeard un um.  i jis' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun'." tom thought a minute or two, and says: "it's a good idea.  and i reckon it's been done.  it _must_ a been done; it stands to reason.  yes, it's a prime good idea.  where could you keep it?" "keep what, mars tom?" "why, a rattlesnake." "de goodness gracious alive, mars tom!  why, if dey was a rattlesnake to come in heah i'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, i would, wid my head." "why, jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little.  you could tame it." "_tame_ it!" "yes--easy enough.  every animal is grateful for kindness and petting, and they wouldn't _think_ of hurting a person that pets them.  any book will tell you that.  you try--that's all i ask; just try for two or three days. why, you can get him so, in a little while, that he'll love you; and sleep with you; and won't stay away from you a minute; and will let you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth." "_please_, mars tom--_doan_' talk so!  i can't _stan_' it!  he'd _let_ me shove his head in my mouf--fer a favor, hain't it?  i lay he'd wait a pow'ful long time 'fo' i _ast_ him.  en mo' en dat, i doan' _want_ him to sleep wid me." "jim, don't act so foolish.  a prisoner's _got_ to have some kind of a dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other way you could ever think of to save your life." "why, mars tom, i doan' _want_ no sich glory.  snake take 'n bite jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory?  no, sah, i doan' want no sich doin's." "blame it, can't you _try_?  i only _want_ you to try--you needn't keep it up if it don't work." "but de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while i's a tryin' him. mars tom, i's willin' to tackle mos' anything 'at ain't onreasonable, but ef you en huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, i's gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_." "well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull-headed about it.  we can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some buttons on their tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and i reckon that 'll have to do." "i k'n stan' _dem_, mars tom, but blame' 'f i couldn' get along widout um, i tell you dat.  i never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner." "well, it _always_ is when it's done right.  you got any rats around here?" "no, sah, i hain't seed none." "well, we'll get you some rats." "why, mars tom, i doan' _want_ no rats.  dey's de dadblamedest creturs to 'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's tryin' to sleep, i ever see.  no, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f i's got to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; i hain' got no use f'r um, skasely." "but, jim, you _got_ to have 'em--they all do.  so don't make no more fuss about it.  prisoners ain't ever without rats.  there ain't no instance of it.  and they train them, and pet them, and learn them tricks, and they get to be as sociable as flies.  but you got to play music to them.  you got anything to play music on?" "i ain' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o' paper, en a juice-harp; but i reck'n dey wouldn' take no stock in a juice-harp." "yes they would _they_ don't care what kind of music 'tis.  a jews-harp's plenty good enough for a rat.  all animals like music--in a prison they dote on it.  specially, painful music; and you can't get no other kind out of a jews-harp.  it always interests them; they come out to see what's the matter with you.  yes, you're all right; you're fixed very well.  you want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep, and early in the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play 'the last link is broken'--that's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything else; and when you've played about two minutes you'll